# Things to figure out asap

* Are we interested in changing actual beliefs or behaviour?
* No. It's difficult to know what we actually believe, even if we think that that we do believe things in a concrete way. We often believe strategically. I agree with arguments that it's too messy to get into whether the state/other individuals should regulate your thoughts kind thing.

Difficulties of focusing on changes to moral behaviour:

* What counts as moral behaviour? Is there a distinction between not liking that someone is impolite and someone systematically stealing. Kind or degree? Is there an argument that all behaviour is moral in some relevant sense? 
Like my purchasing decisions have moral implications, so does speech, presence in spaces, participation in religion, and all parts of our identities. 
That's fine and cool but potentially a problem because it blows out the scope of the thesis: everything that we do is moral behaviour; everything we do probably (in some sense, maybe, broad brushstrokes here) influences the behaviours of others (limits/creates opportunities, generates obligations, changes social climate/imaginary). So the question (lol) just becomes: what are we allowed to do? ... s c o p e
* Can we focus solely on cases of disagreement? I.e. Is it important what strategies we use to influence others moral behaviour when we are all in agreement about it? Probably yes it is. If (to some extent) we're all cool w/ avoiding murder then it's still relevant that we would prefer to be taught this and do so intentionally, rather than perform that moral behaviour through inhumane threats or complete removal of our potential to murder. [That doesn't quite make sense but yknow.] So that makes things about the general permissability of strategies that change others behaviour.
* We are committed to presuming that there is reasonable disagreement over certain types of moral behaviour. 

Focus on justification:
* Presume we have a set of things that we think should be done – things we believe to be morally right - and a bunch of practices that tend to cause people to do those things to varying degrees of success - education, torture, social pressure, advertising. Which of those strategies are we allowed to pursue?

Strategic question is how much I need to flesh out the meta-ethical backgroun. We're looking for normative justification of non-ideal strategies? Can we do so without committing to moral realism. I.e. In a world were we can't get agreement on what is right (either because there is no moral right, or we just haven't nailed down it substance), what are we allowed to do to cultivate particular moral behaviours in others.
