% Thesis outline
% Draft
% 110917

## 1. Introduction

*Motivating question:* Are we justified in using strategies that aim at changing another person's morally significant beliefs.

The literature regarding the ethics of influencing others is as old as it is substantial. From classical accounts of autonomy to contemporary concerns about whether public health campaigns are justified in nudging citizens towards better health choices, the legitimacy of steps we take to regulate others’ actions is well attended to.

Less attention is given to the the legitimacy of practices individuals and institutions adopt to alter the beliefs of others – and whether such any such efforts should be pursued at all. Indeed, there are good reasons to think that we should not concern ourselves with the beliefs of others and confine our influence on others to their actions or expressed attitudes that influence their communities.

In short, the point is to investigate the issues in the ethics of influence that arise when what you are influencing is a morally significant belief.

## 2. Belief and its manipulation

### 2.1 Morally significant beliefs

Two parts:

1. What account of belief am I using
	* Two thoughts: a. I want to spend the bulk of my time on the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies rather than getting mired in the nature and epistemics of belief; b. I want the principles the second half gestures at to be as widely appealing as possible, so not doing something that is plausible on different accounts is preferable
	* [Need to substantially expand the above justification and at least acknowledge the deeper questions I’m leaving outside of the scope.]
	* What will become important is voluntarism, in that whether individuals beliefs are responsive to reason (their own or otherwise) bears directly on how we evaluate persuasion or, say, whether reasons-giving is a legitimacy lending feature of an account of belief-influence
2. What is a morally significant belief. Possible candidates [in substantial of fleshing out]:
	* Consequences for society. That is, beliefs which influence the moral life of others.
* Beliefs that people profess to hold (think here about three cases: people claim to hold a belief and act as if they do; people who claim to hold a belief but do not act consistently with it (the misogynistic feminist); and people who claim not to hold a belief but act as if they believe a certain thing (the 'I'm not racist' bigot)

QUESTION: I’m really not sure I like the “morally significant belief” term.

* What (roughly) are the strategies I’m talking about

### 2.2 Should we manipulate belief?

* What are the strongest reasons not to?
* Responses to these reasons
* We already do influence in untold social ways
* We think influencing belief (might be) a good way of generating the right kinds of behaviour
* We politically want to for [cash this]
* We intuitively don’t want to live in a society where everyone believes something incongruent with the institutions of justice and how everyone behaves

Conclusion: it is to some extent possible to change beliefs, and there are reasons to do it. Therefore, we need to know what we're justified in doing.

## 3. What justifies belief changing strategies?

The previous section has indicated the need for principles of responsible belief-influence, and (hopefully) justified why we want to intentionally positively influence others’ beliefs. It also gestures towards the likely features of a standard of legitimacy, particularly the thought that we should be able to hold stable at least some part of our moral beliefs.

Probably want to lead with analysis of the place that persuasion has held in influence literature and recent work problematising it.

I think there are *two options for structuring from here:*

* Series of examples intended to draw out general principles of legitimate belief-influence, OR
* Consider particular suggested conditions from existing literature and apply them to particular cases
* Expression of intent, reasons giving
* Agency/autonomy of the influenced individual
* Cannot (in some sense) be coercive?

Wrapping this up would be a summary into my account and using whatever space is available to address objections or try and identify problem cases.


## 4. Conclusion
