# Chapter 2 dump

* Formalise the account of MSB:
  * How does moral beliefs relate to moral values and moral judgements? Are they the same thing? Are beliefs a component or subset of moral values. I think we want to say that they're the same thing

# Why am I talking about MSB and not just beliefs?

If I just talk about belief:
* All beliefs my be subjects to challenge
* We have a claim to freedom of belief that isn't derived from moral significance of the belief


Is the MSB thing just justifying the examples I'm going to focus on?
And then it will become clear in four that some things we want socially

# Can I ignore all non-influencable beliefs?

- Yes, the only problem becomes epistemic access to influence

# If voluntarism is untrue do I have two problems:

1. The MSB definition chapter excludes a whole bunch of people

2. It makes persuasion and reasons giving quite difficult

ALTERNATIVE:

1. Not commit to a view about voluntarism. Note the debate and point to recent research on either side.
2. What's the main thing that is riding on voluntarism? The legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies that include reasons giving: that is persuasion
3. The key insight for our project is that persuasion-based belief-influence demonstrably works to change belief. Which means that:
  a. Beliefs are subject to the will and evidence responsive, or
  b. Beliefs aren't subject to the will, but evidence indirectly causes them to change in predicatable ways, or
  c. Beliefs are not subject to the will at all but there is a feature of persuasion that causes them to change
4. Because what we are interested in is belief influence, we need not, then, take a position on voluntarism. We should, however, have particular regard for conclusions in the voluntarism debate might have in our discussion of legitimate belief-influence strategies in chapter five.
