% Chapter 5
% Principles of legitimate doxastic influence

Our discussion thus far has introduced the class of morally significant beliefs, rejected general reasons to eschew belief influence, considered contributing factors to the legitimacy of belief influencing strategies and given positive reasons to pursue active belief influence. This chapter addresses the special place of persuasion in the ethics of influence literature before introducing and discussing three principles of legitimate doxastic influence that should regulate our selection of belief-influencing strategies.

## 5.2 – The place of persuasion

Reasons-giving persuasion of the type one expects to happen in a courtroom or university classroom enjoys a status of default legitimacy compared to other belief influence strategies. Fârte expresses what I understand to be the common view of persuasion’s virtues:

> Conceived as an alternative to doxastic coercion, evidential persuasion produces correct beliefs in accordance with proper standards of evidence. It helps people reach the highest possible standards of rationality and morality. Evidential persuasion is based on the principles of symmetry and reciprocity in that it asks all persuaders to use for changing the beliefs of others only those means they used in forming their own beliefs respecting the freedom of will and assuming the standard of rationality [@farte2016, 74].

This passage hints at several possible features of justified belief strategies, but it does somewhat understate the need to moderate our trust in persuasion. There are several relevant features of the strategy that contemporary analysis highlights. First, persuasion rarely causes instant belief changes upon the presentation of a correct argument or the right evidence. It operates by the same “latent, indirect, and delayed effects” as other strategies [@mackie2006, 288]. Second, Summers’ meta-analysis of recent results in social psychology found the changes in moral beliefs that we take to be the result of persuasion are overwhelmingly _post hoc_ rationalisations of “instincts, inclinations, stereotypes, emotions, neurobiology, habits, reactions, evolutionary pressures, unexamined principles, or justifications other than the ones we think we’re acting on” [@summers2017]. Haidt's analysis of earlier results concur with this conclusion [@haidt2001, 816]. I think these results should moderate any trust we might have once had in our ability to distinguish when we have successfully persuaded from the successful deployment of other belief-influence strategies. Powers rightly argues that upshot here is “the difference between persuasion and coercion is not precise or self-evident” [@powers2007, 125]. Finally, despite emphasising the social benefits of rational persuasion, Tsai is cautious to note that it is open to abuse and can be deployed paternalistically [@tsai2014, 79-80].

As such, we should not underestimate the difficulty of drawing an unambiguous line between persuasion and other belief-influencing strategies. Consider the lawyer who deploys considerable charm at the same time as offering reasons and evidence, or an intellectual bully who harangues you with reasons in an attempt to change your view by attrition. Rational persuasion ought to remain a preferred method of influence for all the reasons discussed in section 3.6, but this is not to underestimate the difficulty of identifying impermissibly coercive and manipulative strategies masquerading as rationality. To have appropriate regard for this difficulty, principles of responsible influence ought to avoid enumerating legitimate belief-influencing strategies and instead guide our choices of strategies and the disposition with which they are deployed.

## 5.3 – Rejecting coercion and manipulation

The first necessary condition for the legitimacy of a belief-influencing strategy is that it does not coerce or manipulate the influenced person. There are two elements to my account here.

First, we should view strategies that influence beliefs by giving people prudential reasons to change (or act to indirectly change) their beliefs as illegitimate. I follow McMyler in thinking that this amounts to coercion [@mcmyler2011, 556]. Threats or use of violence or social coercion like ostracism from a friendship group and shaming can affect belief-change by giving prudential reasons for someone to aggressively attempt belief change, but these strategies are not evidentiary and unfairly distort the suite of possible beliefs an individual can rationally engage with [@radzik2014, 660].

Second, belief-influencing strategies that involve the influencer knowingly lying to or misleading the subject should be regarded as manipulative and hence impermissible. While it might be easier to bring about belief change about the moral status of vegetarianism by exaggerating the suffering of animals in slaughterhouses, this undermines the influenced person’s ability to have confidence in the evidence that influenced their belief and should be avoided. But how do we reconcile this requirement with the use of emotional appeals or highlighting particular evidence regarding a situation? These are not necessarily misleading, although intentionally withholding relevant evidence is certainly manipulative. There is a difference between taking someone to an abattoir in aide of persuading them to cease eating meat and fabricating the suffering of animals to the same end. The use of images and experiences at the abattoir is fine so long as they do not mislead the subject. They must be relevant to the morally significant belief at issue. This analysis would also suggest the aforementioned lawyer's use of charm to persuade is illegitimate: charm is simply not relevant to the content of the morally significant belief at issue. To exploit its power would amount to manipulation.

## 5.4 – Indoctrination or moral education?

It follows from Section 5.3 that indoctrinatory strategies of belief influence are clearly illegitimate on my account. This raises two interesting cases that will caveat the first condition of coercion or manipulation voiding legitimacy of a belief-influencing strategy. First, should we consider the inculcation of beliefs in children (frequently without reasons-giving) that occurs in schools illegitimate? Second, there are circumstances—say when an adult has been brainwashed into joining a cult—when no belief-influencing strategies but coercive or manipulative interventions are likely to achieve the desired belief change. Are we ever justified in taking such steps?

Merry's analysis of what legitimates moral education of children can be expanded to elegantly answer both questions. Merry argues that it is permissible to instill ethical principles in children who are yet to fully develop an ability to rationally engage with belief influence when those principles are minimally required to create a “foundation on which autonomy and rationality can build” [@merry2005, 412; @bialystok2014, 415]. On this view it is not coercive to drastically influence the moral beliefs of children so long as the influence does no more than inculcate their rational capabilities.

The same principle justifies the occasional deployment of coercive belief-influencing strategies against adults. Think here of the adult who has fallen into a cult. Typically forced reeducation or deprogramming courses would be paradigm cases of coercion and strictly impermissible, but if membership of the cult has eroded the autonomy and rationality of the individual I would argue that they are returned to the same state as a child and we are justified in intervening coercively only to the extent necessary to restore their rationality.

One might object that this approach is paternalistic to adults, but I contend that belief influence can secure an individual’s rationality without inculcating a full conception of the good. As such, the approach does not allow one adult to indoctrinate a conception of the good in another—it is not paternalistic. Further, having stable rationality allows one to identify and avoid paternalistic policies and other manipulation. The adult who is the subject of coercive belief-influencing strategies to restore their rationality is therefore not paternalised, but in a better position to avoid being the subject of paternalism.

## 5.5 – Preferring rational influence

Following my argument in Section 3.6, I contend that a strong preference for electing to use rational, reasons-giving belief-influence strategies is the second necessary principle in determining legitimate belief-influencing strategies. Non-rational strategies like nudging or appeals to emotion are not wrong so long as their use is not coercive or manipulative by the standards I have identified. I have, however, explicated the practical difficulty of determining whether particular strategies amount to manipulation in a given circumstance so suggest that an important way of mitigating this risk is explicitly communicating your intent to deploy a non-rational belief-influencing strategy to the subject of the strategy. Coupled with a strong preference for the selection of rational strategies, this condition for legitimate belief influence can appropriately engage the influence person's rational capabilities [@horsthemke2014 38; @scarantino2008, 32].

Consider the legitimate deployment of two archetypal forms of non-rational influence: emotional appeals and nudging. In contrast to the illegitimate uses of emotional appeals like the use of charm by a lawyer, consider the useful aide that non-rational emotional evidence brings to reasons-giving persuasive argument. The image of Alan Kurdi, a three year old Kurdish refugee who drowned in the Mediterranean Sea in 2015, is, in my view, an effective and legitimate tool in influencing beliefs about refugees. Kurdi’s image assists in the processing of reasons-giving testimony about the reality of life as a refugee. Kelland and Macleod acknowledge this role of emotional aides in their analysis of using images in debates about the permissibility of abortion:

> affective responses themselves by disclosing value, directing our attention and making available to us our inherent moral judgements should not be seen as merely sentimentally evocative. Rather, they presuppose rationality [@kelland2015, 192]

Likewise, nudging strategies that exploit results in behavioural psychology—for example, modifying default options for organ donors, rearranging items on a menu or aggressively presenting graphic information about the risk of behaviours like smoking—are not necessarily wrong when deployed with a view to influencing morally significant beliefs. Such strategies modify the context of a choice, but I agree with Sunstein that they do not remove an individual’s freedom in making that choice and therefore should not be considered manipulative for our purposes [@sunstein2015, 512; @quigley2014].

But while they are not strictly impermissible I have argued that we should prefer rational to non-rational belief-influence strategies because the former exercise the rational abilities we are required to maintain to live a full doxastic life. Riley rightly counts this necessity to develop the “capacity to engage in critical reason” among the reasons to eschew nudging and similar strategies for rational alternatives [@riley2017, 605]. I further follow Etchemendy in thinking that frequent deployment of non-rational strategies on the part of a belief influencer indicates something “arrogant and presumptuous” about their approach to doxastic influence [@etch2017, 34]. This should be avoided.

## 5.6 – The content of beliefs

Before I synthesise the preceding sections into three principles of legitimate doxastic influence, I want to address the role that the content of beliefs we are trying to impress on others should play in the legitimising belief-influence strategies. If a belief we hold is true and we are incredibly confident in it, then should that not influence the belief-influencing strategies available to us? Can we not go further in disseminating this belief than someone who holds an incorrect belief?

I think a correct account of legitimate doxastic influence answers no to both of these questions and should be neutral to the content of beliefs that people would like to inculcate in others. In the first instance, I take issue with the thought that we should have more strategies available to us to push a belief that we have a high degree of confidence in. Issues with the epistemic accessibility and accuracy of measuring confidence aside, confidence in a belief tends not to correlate with that belief going uncontested. Allowing increased confidence to expand the range of legitimate belief-influencing strategies would result in the deluded individual with extreme confidence in their beliefs and the religious zealot who considers their beliefs dogma having greater license to influence moral belief than the rational person with an appropriate level of doubt about the truth of their beliefs.

One might point out that we do not typically allow belief-influence to proceed in a content-neutral way. We clearly favour some beliefs over others by, say, teaching children the value of multiculturalism without introducing opposing white-supremacist views into the classroom. I do not think this is inconsistent with content-neutrality, simply because it is up to individuals and organisations to decide what belief-influence they choose to pursue and it is the proponents of multiculturalism in this case that hold positions of influence. That is to say that there is a difference between saying that the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies does not bear on the content of the beliefs being pushed and requiring that all beliefs have equal opportunities to be influential. I have only argued for the former. This position means that ethicists of belief need not agree what constitutes a correct or good belief. Further, by avoiding prescribing which beliefs are right, the content-neutrality requirement allows room for minority beliefs to gain majority appeal over time. Recall this was a necessary requirement of realistic account of legitimate doxastic influence.

One might object that content-neutrality wrongly affords holders of morally abhorrent beliefs the same right to influence as everyone else. To carry this objection, it’s proponent would have to defend a substantive account of correct belief that identifies which beliefs are abhorrent enough to warrant restriction. I acknowledge the efforts of the liberal analyses of hate speech to identify such an account, but suggest that the lack of success in that regard should lead us to prefer a content-neutral approach that grants the same methods of belief-influence to all members of the doxastic community [@song2014, 1047]

## 5.7 – Three principles of legitimate doxastic influence

Proposed principles of ethical influence have been largely domain-specific, focussing for example on the gamification of employment and conduct of advertisers [@kim2016, 157; @lee2013, 227]. None of these have focussed on the particular issues that arise from doxastic influence. As such, I offer three principles for the selection of legitimate doxastic influence strategies that have arisen from the preceding discussion.

1. Belief-influencing strategies which are coercive or manipulative in the senses discussed in section 5.3 are illegitimate, except where they are deployed to instill in someone the rationality required to participate in the doxastic community
2. We should strongly prefer rational belief-influence strategies
3. We should be transparent about the belief-influencing methods or methods being deployed. Where possible this should involve the explicit communication to the subject of your intent to influence their belief

I’ve discussed at some length in sections 5.2 and 5.3 the kind of strategies the first principle would render legitimate. Likewise, section 5.5 addresses the consequences of a preference for rational strategies. With regard to the third principle I contend that a requirement for transparency of method contributes to the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies for the same reasons as the preference for rational strategies: it minimises concerns about undermining of autonomy and the risk of paternalism without limiting the belief-influencing strategies available to an influencer. The third principle may trade off some effectiveness of some non-rational influence methods by alerting the subject to their operation, but I do not see this as a negative feature of the account: if a subject’s awareness of a strategy undermines that strategy’s effectiveness then that is merely the subject exercising their freedom to resist influence.

The practical impact of adopting these principles of doxastic influence would be somewhat varied. The idealised picture of honest and careful reasons-giving persuasion remains the most legitimate method of belief influence on my account. Indeed, the common approaches to belief influence that the principles deem illegitimate are those most used by advertisers, politicians and evangelists: parties who do not necessarily explicitly acknowledge their purpose in influencing your beliefs and tend to exploit affective and other non-rational influence strategies to effect changes in belief [@lee2013, 225]. A strength of my account is that it clarifies the legitimate role that use of images and emotional appeals can play in our everyday doxastic practices. Scarantino raises the example of “driver education courses where young drivers are taken to visit rehabilitation centres for road accident victims” [@scarantino2008, 28]. It is clear, on my view, that coupled with the evidence and reasons-giving elements of an education course this is permissible.

It is worth considering whether the application of the principles differ for the state and other institutions. I would suggest that the state and institutions might have different belief-influencing methods available to them and certainly operate at a different scale of belief-influence but because the subject of the influence remains individuals they can be regulated by the same principles. Further consideration could be given to whether there are distinct features of belief influence by the state and other institutions that change what legitimates their beliefs-influence strategies. Perhaps state duties to the citizenry that individuals do not possess override certain concerns about manipulation. This bears further research.

## 5.8 – Conclusion

The ethical issues that arise from the nature of morally significant beliefs and the legitimacy of particular belief-influencing methods remains under-researched. Good attention has been given to individual influence strategies and categories of permissible influence in general, but too little work has been done to draw this research together and make it responsive to the particular role belief plays in our personal and political lives. Several issues worthy of further attention include explicating the practical impact of adopting principles of legitimate doxastic influence, clarifying the application of the principles to state exercises of influence, and considering how persistent we are permitted to be in pursuing a belief-influence strategy.

This paper considered the particularities of morally significant beliefs, responded to arguments that we should minimise doxastic influence we have over others and offered positive reasons for pursuing active belief-influencing strategies. Finally, I synthesised my discussion into three principles of legitimate doxastic influence. The advantage of the principles I’ve tendered is they are responsive to the reality of our doxastic practices. More often than not we have an array of belief-influencing strategies to chose from and a further need to behave with awareness of our passive social belief influence. The principles eschew enumerating illegitimate beliefs and instead guide this choice and the disposition towards transparency that I have argued is required of responsible doxastic practice. They offer a clear starting point for us to become more responsible influencers of belief and more responsible members of healthy doxastic communities.
