# Chapter 2
## Morally Significant Beliefs

This paper is concerned with the strategies an individual is justified in adopting when they want to influence another’s beliefs. This chapter specifies the class of “morally significant beliefs” whose justified influence we are interested in, identifies features of the class that will assist with our later discussion and addresses the relationship of the project to the philosophy of belief.

Most simply, your morally significant beliefs are the moral and value judgements and other moral commitments you have made that are likely to be disagreed with and contested by others. The class intends to capture the moral beliefs that we often feel most like we ought to try and change in others. That is, the most common and consequential sources of disagreement; those beliefs that from time to time (or all too often) find themselves at the centre of social and political debates.

The central beliefs that count as morally significant on this account are reasonably intuitive to grasp. Statements such as “gay couples ought not to have the same legal status as straight couples owing to their sexual orientation”, “all people should be maximally free and equal and a society’s institutions should reflect this”, “abortion is wrong”, “white people are morally superior to others and are thus deserving of greater rights”, “a transcendent god exists and their followers teachings are the only true source of moral judgements”, “climate change is fake” and “vaccines cause autism in children and are thereby morally wrong” all express paradigmatic examples of morally significant beliefs.
While the beliefs just listed, I hope, intuitively bear a group relation it should be emphasised that there are a variety of different features of these beliefs that give them morally significance. Some make moral claims about others (“gay couples ought not to have the same legal status as straight couples owing to their sexual orientation”), some make universal judgements that assess the lives and behaviour of others (“abortion is wrong”), and some are counted as morally significant because they’re empirical claims with moral consequences (“climate change is fake”). This breadth, I think, effectively captures the kind of deeply-held moral commitments that tend to give rise to claims that certain beliefs should be immune from criticism or influence. We will examine these claims in chapter three.

The example beliefs cited can all be reasonably characterised as serious moral issues and are the subject of substantial contemporary disagreement. But it is not necessary for our purposes to exclude less hotly contested beliefs from the class of morally significant beliefs. What is morally significant, and the magnitude of a belief’s significance is socially and culturally determined. (I will expand on this point shortly.) As such I do not exclude from the class of morally significant beliefs many beliefs that others’ might well like to influence but which do not meet an folk sense of moral significance.

Allow me to point out a few features of the class morally significant beliefs which will be important to our later discussion.

First, both direct moral judgements and empirical judgements with moral consequences are included. A direct moral judgement does not rely on any empirical claim. Consider a racist’s view that people of colour are innately undeserving of that same moral status as white people. This belief makes no empirical claim. By contrast a belief such as “vaccines cause autism in children and are thereby morally wrong” does make an empirical claim. It is important that we include both types of beliefs in the scope of our discussion for two reasons. First, both types feature heavily in contemporary debates, particularly when the moral consequences of empirical claims are at issue as in debates about vaccines, climate change, and access to guns. Further, it is often unclear whether someone’s belief is contingent on an empirical claim or not. It is easy to imagine the racist’s belief mentioned just now framed not as ‘people of colour are innately undeserving of the same moral status as white people’, but ‘I believe that crime statistics warrant my belief that people of colour are innately undeserving of the same moral status as white people’. Such slippage between direct moral judgement and empirical judgement with moral consequences is common enough that we are best to consider both as morally significant beliefs. Second, beliefs that make empirical claims are likely to be responsive to different types of belief-influence that we will discuss in chapter five: it is a very different thing to give someone evidence for your belief in the science and positive public health function of vaccines, than it is to give reasons for your belief in an omnipotent god.

Second, religious beliefs are included in the class of morally significant beliefs. Their inclusion should be uncontroversial. Religious beliefs are precisely the type of deeply-held but regularly contested belief that we have discussed thus far. Consideration of religious belief is of particular use to our study because religious adherents often claim that no interpersonal belief-influence strategy can influence their faith beliefs [@buchak2017, 115]. This being true (I will return to claims of uninfluencable belief later) it is difficult to imagine the permissibility of any belief-influencing strategy that might cause personal disruption for the subject when the strategy is aimed at a altering a belief  that cannot change. Finally, religion also offers one of the clearest examples of an individual motivated to influence others’ beliefs: the evangelist.

Third, what counts as a morally significant belief clearly changes over time and is culturally and socially located. Once, moral norms and the authority of the Catholic Church were such that whether one believed that the earth revolved around the sun was an empirical claim of extreme moral significance. Now, of course, what was Galileo’s loss is our gain. It is not just morally permissible to be a heliocentrist committed to the view that the earth and planets orbit the sun, it is difficult to conceive of the issue as a moral one at all. It is with this feature of our social moral lives in mind that I keep open that what counts as a morally significant belief might be the subject of as much contest as the beliefs themselves. This means our account of legitimate belief-influencing strategies must be responsive to changing moral norms.

This is particularly evident in making the fourth observation that some morally significant beliefs have different credence than others at different times, in different communities. The moral beliefs of the early suffragettes or slavery abolitionists were at one time far from the most commonly held beliefs about voting and slavery of their respective societies, but those beliefs are dominant today. I argue that we want our doxastic practices to be such that moral beliefs are able make the same passage from the margins to the centre of our moral lives, just as the right of women to vote did. To demand any less of our belief-influencing practices would risk closing our moral community off to progress. As I will argue in chapter four, avoiding this risk is a good reason to allow for substantial interpersonal influence of belief. For now it is sufficient to note that the manner in which moral beliefs are held by different proportions of society over time, gives rise to two claims. First, there is the claim of the exasperated climate scientist, who faced once more with the demand to reconsider the conclusions of their climate research in which the vast majority of society believes says to the climate denialist “my belief that you consider morally significant is so widely accepted that it should not be up for debate”. A second claim that arises process something like this: “My moral belief—that polyamorous relationships should enjoy the same legal rights as straight couples, for instance—is currently marginal. I don’t want it’s current unpopularity to prevent it from becoming a common moral belief, and I want to distinguish it from other unpopular moral beliefs that have been discarded by my moral community.” The interests in these claims are prima facie somewhat opposed. The former hopes that the popularity of a morally significant belief grants it some sort of special reprieve from contest and constant justification. The latter hopes that the opposition of a moral belief to another prevailing belief of the time (in this instance the belief that polyamorous couple ought not enjoy the same legal rights as straight couples) does not prevent it from becoming the more common belief. A successful account of legitimate belief-influence will manage these competing interests.

## 2.2 – Three claims about belief

One might rightly point out, at this juncture, that I have not yet given an account of what belief is, nor have I grounded my class of morally significant beliefs by staking positions in the usual range of ontological and epistemic questions that concern the philosophy of belief. I have avoided making such commitments for three reasons. First, this paper is concerned with the justification of interpersonal belief-influencing strategies. Consideration of what precisely belief consists in or its logical structure are regrettably outside the scope of this project. Second, the question of justification that this project is concerned with depends less on what belief consists in and more on what we take to be its moral status. That is to say, if you are satisfied that the class of morally significant beliefs that I have sketched indeed outlines something of moral significance, and you are satisfied that there are somewhat reliable strategies for influencing the members of that class, then those are sufficient grounds to motivate consideration of the justification of belief-influencing strategies. Third, an account of justified interpersonal belief-influence that does not depend on just one account of the nature and ethics of beliefs and instead is compatible with many will be more widely acceptable to philosophers of belief. I intend to offer a broadly acceptable account of justified interpersonal belief-influence, and take this breadth to be an appealing feature of my approach.

To defend this approach, I want to make explicit the three minimal claims I make about the nature of belief in this paper and assess where this leaves me with regard to standard positions in the philosophy of belief. The three claims are:

1. There are moral judgements and beliefs of the type I have termed “morally significant beliefs” which play an important role in our moral lives.
2. These moral judgements and beliefs can more or less reliably influenced by a variety of strategies
3. These moral judgements are to some extent perceptible in and reportable by individuals

These claims accommodate the most common views in the literature, but cannot hope to allow for them all. I will address each claim and a few concerns in turn.

The first claim is, I take it, reasonably uncontroversial. One might object that the class of morally significant beliefs encompasses too many elements that should not be addressed together. You might think, for instance, that empirical claims should not be grouped with direct moral judgements, and that more care should have been taken to acknowledge and delineate between affective and cognitive components of moral beliefs. These categorisation concerns are important, but not for this project. In the first instance, I reiterate that a belief or moral judgement’s membership of the class of morally significant beliefs does not depend on what one considers belief to consist in. The class merely marks out the range of beliefs that will be of particular interest to our discussion of justified belief-influence and notes several features of this range. The members of the class need not all be of the same kind. Indeed, my account thus far allows that the members of the morally significant belief class could be a mix of cognitive and affective judgements, various attitudes, as well as empirical claims – and any mix therein. Second, I maintain that my account of morally significant beliefs does capture an intuitively graspable set of beliefs that are held, professed and reflected in action in the real world. If this is the case, my discussion has captured something worth studying.

Eliminativists regarding belief would also object to the first claim. Eliminativists deny altogether the existence of that which we refer to as beliefs. On this view, to adopt Churchland’s vivid terms, our observation that we have beliefs “may be as badly misplaced as was the classical man's visual certainty that the star-flecked sphere of the heavens turns daily” [@churchland1981, 70; @taylor1994]. I do not have the space to assess responses to the eliminativist view, save to note that it holds a “fairly unpopular” position in the philosophy of belief [@joyce2013, 517]. But I would say that it is a step further than denying the existence of beliefs to deny that the class of morally significant beliefs do not identify _some set of things_ to which we attribute moral value and which is the substantial subject of disagreement. On this view, the justification of belief-influencing strategies remain a pressing project, even for an eliminativist.

Am I right in claiming that beliefs be influenced? The short answer is yes, the morally significant class that we are interested in can be. But more needs to be said about how and by whom morally significant beliefs can be influenced. In general, beliefs divide into three categories qua being influencable. First, there are some beliefs that cannot be influenced. The paradigmatic case here is perceptual beliefs. No matter what is said to me or what kind of duress I am under, if the sun is shining out the window I will be unable to believe anything other than that the sun is shining.[^delusions] Second, there are beliefs people verbally or otherwise report cannot be influenced. Religious believers who find and report that their faith in a particular god is absolutely unshakeable populate this category, along with individuals who have attempted to change a belief that they hold and have been unable to do so. These cases will be instructive for later discussion regarding respecting belief. Finally, there are those beliefs that can be influenced. These include the bulk of moral and value judgements which are part of the morally significant beliefs class.

[^delusions]: This is not necessarily true when we allow that I might have delusions or have my perception otherwise interfered with, but I leave this aside for the sake of brevity.

A variety of processes are known to reliably—that is, with some consistency—influence our beliefs. In addition to reasons-giving persuasion, the classical method of influencing belief, other targeted strategies can influence our moral beliefs. Consider for example for the use of emotionally-charged image in moral arguments, and the use of results from behavioural psychology studies to “nudge” our approach to moral decisions [@kelland2015; @thaler2008]. The legitimacy of alternate belief-influence strategies like these is the primary concern of this paper. But it would be a mischaracterisation to suggest that our beliefs are primarily formed and influenced by persuasion and other targeted strategies. Both standard rationalist and intuitionist accounts of moral judgement allow that social influence plays a large role in the mechanisms through which we influence the morally significant beliefs of others, and through which our own are influenced [@haidt2001, 828]. Fârte gives a clear account of how social belief influence occurs [@farte2016; @liu2014]. I endorse McMyler’s analysis of the manner in which belief can be influenced by coercion, albeit in a different manner to the coercion of action [@mcmyler2011, 556]. McMyler identifies two types of doxastic coercion. “Indirect doxastic coercion” occurs when a threat is issued which becomes the reason to act to bring about the belief. For example a teacher threatens detention to cause a student to do their civics homework, thereby bringing about a belief in the importance of voting. “Compelled doxastic coercion” occurs when a standing threat of sanction compels belief-acquisition over time. Changes in belief of individuals in response to the implied threat of exclusion from their friendship circle would be considered compelled doxastic coercion [@mcmyler2011, 554-555].

In the preceeding examples of belief influence the strategies discussed have been such that an individual, organisation or the state might wield them against another individual—they’re been outwardly directed. But do individuals have voluntary control over their moral beliefs? That is, do individuals have direct or indirect doxastic control? The literature approaches consensus that we do have indirect doxastic control, that “subjects have control over factors that influence what they believe rather than control over those beliefs themselves” [@peels2014, 694]. This allows me to pursue strategies like attempting to form relationships with a wide range of people if I hope to inculcate a belief in the the moral value of diverse communities. There is far more ongoing disagreement regarding direct doxastic voluntarism. [^voluntarist]

[^voluntarist]: See @nottelmann2017 against direct doxastic voluntarism, and @alston1989 for the positions classical statement. Cf. @steup2017.

Must I, then, commit myself to a position on voluntarism? After all, whether the individuals have direct control over their beliefs greatly changes the legitimacy of persuasion and reasons-giving belief-influence strategies. While it is certainly try the outcome of the voluntarism debate will likely affect our legitimacy assessments to some degree the key insight for our project is that, as noted already, persuasion-based belief-influence reliably works to change belief. This could mean that beliefs _are_ subject to voluntary control, or beliefs aren’t subject to voluntary control but are evidence-responsive in some seemingly predictable way (after all we persuade knowing what view successful persuasion will likely result in the persuadee obtaining), or that beliefs are not subject to the will at all but there is some feature of persuasion that still causes them to change. Because what we are primarily interested in is belief influence, we need not, then, take a position on voluntarism. We should, however, have appropriate regard for the effect different answers to the direct voluntarism question will have on our discussion of legitimate belief-influence strategies in chapter five.

The third claim I made about belief was that morally significant beliefs “are to some extent perceptible in and reportable by individuals”. By this I mean that we are able to discern that individuals hold morally significant beliefs, or individuals are able to report, verbally or otherwise to us, that they. This phrasing sets an intentionally low standard which admits some doubt about the beliefs we suppose others hold. While questions regarding the precise attribution of belief—what counts as holding a belief, to what extent do we have epistemic access to other’s beliefs, should verbal reports or a record of action be considered the marker where the two conflict—are valuable in general, their answers are not crucial to the success of this project. This is because the kind of belief-influencing strategy whose justification we are interested in can be deployed for a variety of reasons without requiring that the belief that they may influence away be certainly present in the influenced individual. Consider a child raised watching their parent’s behaviour who eventually forms the view that their parent is racist. Consider another child who became aware of their parent’s racism when their parent informs them of their belief. Finally, consider a child who has never heard their parent act or report in a way that betrays their racism. If each of these children begins to pursue belief-influencing strategies aimed at inculcating a belief in the moral equality of all races in their parent, then their project is the same positive one aimed at introducing something in the parent. It’s justification prima facie does not depend on the strength or truth of observations that lead to its inception. The worst case scenario, is that one (likely the third) or more parents are have a pre-existing belief of theirs influenced.

In this section, I've suggested there is an intuitively graspable class of beliefs that are morally significant. I've gone to some lengths to indicate the scope of this class, and noted that it does not need to be narrowly defined for the success of this project. I have identified several features of morally significant beliefs that will inform our later discussion and explicated the three minimal claims regarding belief that I make going forward.
