# Chapter 3
## Should we avoid influencing beliefs?

This Chapter will look closely at the precise claim people might be making when they say “I have a right to my beliefs”.

It is common enough to hear someone faced with attempts to have their beliefs on some moral matter influenced say “well, I have a right to my beliefs”. I suspect many people would feel that this statement gets something right about the extent to which our beliefs should be exposed to influence. Further, I think many people would consider some “right to my beliefs” to apply with particular strength to deeply-held morally significant beliefs. They might think that religious beliefs or deep commitments to values that guide the course of moral lives should not have to be open to influence by just any old person with a different belief and the will to try to impress it upon others.

We should take this set of intuitions seriously, if only because it appears that something like these thoughts is an operational principle in many people’s everyday doxastic practices. But it is not immediately clear what exactly the thought “some or all of my beliefs should to some extent be immune from influence” or the claim “I have a right for my beliefs to go uninfluenced” consists in.

I think there are seven standard ways someone might try to justify these types of intuitions or otherwise argue that there exists a general reason to refrain from influencing others’ beliefs. These arguments derive from concerns about the need to

1. Respect beliefs and believers,
2. Ensure autonomy is not undermined by influence,
3. Protect constitutive elements of personal identities and the integrity of selves,
4. Secure a political right to freedom of belief,
5. Develop rational capabilities,
6. Minimise the risk of inculcating incorrect beliefs, and
7. Minimise epistemic uncertainty surrounding the outcome of belief influence strategies.

I will consider each argument in turn and ask whether they give a good reason to refrain in part or whole from influencing others’ beliefs. On some of these points (Sections 3.2, 3.5 and 3.6) I take up Matthew Etchemendy’s recent analysis of reasons to avoid non-rational belief influence, enlarge his project to consider belief influence in general, and take issue with his conclusions regarding legitimate belief-influence in anticipation of our discussion in Chapter five [@etch2017]. I conclude that none of the seven reasons offer a strong reason to eschew all belief influence. Several suggest reasons for concern about the legitimacy of belief influence strategies with particular features. These concerns will need to be weighed against the positive reasons for pursuing belief-influence that I discuss in Chapter four. I conclude this Section by considering how ethicists of belief committed to influence minimisation should approach the reality of everyday social belief influence.

### 3.1 – Respect

There are several ways in which a claim that we are required to respect the morally significant beliefs of others and thereby refrain from influencing those beliefs might be made out. First, when people claim that their beliefs should be respected, I would venture that they are sometimes asking that the important social and psychological roles that their beliefs play be respected. A more formal argument in support of this view might proceed as follows. We value our beliefs and the beliefs of others for two reasons. In the first instance, they play a central role in our daily cognitive life and our actions. They act as a store of (in some loose sense) predetermined positions on matters that allow us to navigate the world efficiently. They also guide how we conceive of the good and shape which projects we take to be worth pursuing in life. Second, beliefs play an equally important role in our discourse as a society. Society is frequently discussed in terms of moral values (“the fair go”), and we memorialise moral beliefs people held (“she always believed in equality”). The two central roles that moral beliefs play in our lives, the thought goes, mean that our morally significant beliefs are not to be haphazardly tampered with. The practical and psychological roles that our beliefs play mean they should be accorded greater respect. If this argument holds, what would one have to do to disrespect moral beliefs and the role they play? I think the proponent of this view would suggest that moral beliefs are disrespected when you undermine the social and psychological functions they serve.

Our question becomes, then, whether belief influence undermines the valued psychological and social place of belief. I do not think that it does. I will address the psychological role that belief plays in greater detail when I consider whether the importance of beliefs to our identity or integrity of self amounts to a reason to avoid belief influence, but suffice to say for now I do not think that is the case. We have been raised as subjects of belief influence and every day weather attempts by governments, advertisers, friends and other parties to influence our beliefs. If the valuable role that our beliefs play in our personal psychological lives survive this on a daily basis, it is implausible to say that respecting this role requires that we eschew all belief influence. On the note of belief's social role, I submit that part of this role is to be exposed to influence. Beliefs play a prominent role in society’s discussion of their self-conception precisely because we understand that beliefs change and we seek to have them examined, influenced and confirmed. It makes no sense to think then that we should avoid influencing beliefs in order to respect the social role that they play.

A second way a need to respect beliefs might be argued for is by pointing to some feature of belief practices that, in general, makes attempting to influence belief a bad idea. A proponent of this view would likely argue that the chance many of our most deeply-held beliefs are wrong makes influencing beliefs disrespectful. That we are likely incorrect in many of our own beliefs is, I think, a reasonable inference to make from the number of people around us whose rationality we respect and whose social influences we are aware of but who have arrived at different beliefs on important moral matters. This being true, it would be foolhardy to attempt to influence the beliefs of others to match your own when, despite feeling otherwise, you lack certainty that your beliefs are correct. We should accord the beliefs of others the respect we give our own beliefs we believe to be correct. Or, to put it another way, we should respect the beliefs of others in case they prove to be right. As such, the thought goes, we should eschew opportunities to influence others’ beliefs.

I think this argument is valuable for emphasising that there is a _prima facie_ relationship between our degree of confidence in our beliefs and the extent to which we feel justified in attempting to inculcate those beliefs in others. Again, however, the argument does not amount to a general reason to avoid belief influence. There is naturally a great deal of epistemic uncertainty in the truth of beliefs that we hold. But I want to suggest that confidence in a belief is not an appropriate candidate for what in part justifies attempting to inculcate others with a belief. If this were the case, religious adherents, ideological zealots who are impervious to reason and holders of delusions would have a free pass to the legitimacy of the belief-influencing strategies that they deploy, while thoroughgoing rational people with an appropriate level of doubt about the truth of their beliefs would lack justification.

The thought that we owe respect to beliefs and believers underscores the emotional and procedural significance that moral beliefs have in real lives. While respecting these beliefs does not necessitate that we refrain from influencing them, the arguments offered suggest there is good reason to be sensitive to the way beliefs are valued socially when considering their influence.

I have thoroughly considered whether according appropriate respect to persons or beliefs in and of themselves requires that we minimise our influence over others' beliefs. I now want to make the more basic observation that the prominence of some need to respect the beliefs of others in our intuitions about moral beliefs is a norm that is by no means universally shared. By this I mean to observe that social practice in many doxastic communities frequently do not require us to respect belief. Some communities simply do not have this among their doxastic norms. Others seem to consider specific morally significant beliefs fringe enough to be safely derided by particular Sections of the community. Think of the young atheist’s attitude toward life-long religious adherents or contemporary conservatives who deride the “politically correct left”.

This is all to say that there are other intuitions that compete with the sense that we should respect beliefs. In particular the intuition that we should let people believe what they want to believe so long as they don't behave in accordance with beliefs whose expressions are harmful runs up against the intuition that we resent and want to reform someone who holds beliefs we find objectionable. The former intuition suggests that we should allow a lifelong sexist who has learned not to behave in a sexist manner to maintain their sexist beliefs unhindered. The latter intuition suggests that we are right to resent and want to reform the beliefs of someone we know to be sexist even though they don’t behave in a sexist manner. We have given considerable thought to the former intuition, but less to the latter. As our discussion turns to the positive justification of belief influence in Chapter four, it will be valuable to bear the latter intuition in mind.

### 3.2 – Autonomy

After appeals to respect belief or believers, protecting agents’ autonomy is a standard reason for thinking that we should avoid acting to influence agents’ beliefs. The rough sense is that allowing belief influence would amount to allowing others to control your thoughts, and that such control undermines the autonomy or self-governance that we usually take to be valuable. Buss puts the worry about violating autonomy elegantly when she asks

> If there are limitations on how we can justifiably treat one another, then isn’t this, in part, because, independent of our more particular concerns, it is a good thing for each of us to determine our own will? [@buss2005, 196]

Taking care not to violate autonomy will prove to be an important condition for the legitimacy of a belief-influencing strategy, and I will defend this condition at greater length in Chapter five. For now, I need only show that belief-influencing strategies do not, in general, violate autonomy in such a way as to justify avoiding pursuing them at all.

Autonomy as a concept enjoys the rare distinction in philosophical literature (perhaps alongside justice) of having so many and varied accounts of what it is or what it consists in that the term itself tells us little about the view being proffered. Brevity regrettably dictates that I cannot engage in an exhaustive analysis of different accounts of autonomy and their implications for my project. Etchemendy does an able job of identifying the senses in which people value autonomy which are relevant to the intuition that we should eschew non-rational belief-influencing strategies [@etch2017, 16-22]. I will take up each of these in turn and consider this Chapter’s question of whether they offer a strong general reason to eschew belief influence.

On the first general view of autonomy, one is autonomous if they answer yes to the question “Could the person still do what she wanted to do if she wanted to do something different than she actually does, or would somebody stop her?” [@etch2017, 18] Concerns about belief-influencing strategies undermining this type of autonomy do not pose a general reason to avoid influencing belief because such strategies can conceivably harm and enhance this type of autonomy in different situations. For instance, you could be brainwashed into believing that you should give away all of your worldly possessions and find your ability to do differently undermined. Conversely, persuasion by knowledgeable others could influence you to believe that there are more morally valuable career options available to you. Hence there is no general reason to avoid influence strategies on this view of autonomy.

A second standard way of framing autonomy is that we have autonomy when we psychologically self-determine or “control the content of one’s own mind” [@etch2017, 18]. This conception of autonomy does not give rise to a general reason to avoid belief influence because we frequently fail to have control over the content of our minds without feeling that our autonomy has been violated. I do not choose to believe the sun is shining when I look out the window and find that it is shining. Nor do I have control over that belief entering in my mind. Yet we would not feel that my autonomy has been violated in an ethically significant way. Moreover, regarding the ethics of beliefs, I think we ought to be wary of the idea of people controlling the contents of their own mind in too strong a sense. We would not prefer, I think, that people be able to freely choose to hold beliefs that are utter contrary to evidence and reason.

We might find more appealing, then, the third view that we are autonomous if our beliefs are the product of _our_ reasoning not that of others. Again, this view of autonomy does not give a general reason to eschew belief influence, this time because it is hard to conceive of our reasoning as realistically entirely independent of social reasoning and an epistemic community: at some point our evidence and epistemic practices are socially influenced. It makes no sense, then, to view explicit strategies of belief influence that appeal to an agent’s rationality as undermining autonomy, while allowing substantial influence over beliefs to take indirectly without explicit intention and not think this undermines autonomy.

A final standard conception of autonomy to consider holds roughly that we are autonomous when we act rationally. Subscribers to this view would be comfortable with belief influence strategies that engage an agent’s rationality, but wary of less overt strategies like nudging or emotional appeals. For now, it is enough to note that someone committed to this view of autonomy would be okay with rational belief-influencing strategies, and as such this view of autonomy does not give rise to a general reason to avoid belief influence.

I should note that a possible general response to concerns about autonomy would be to argue that autonomy is not valuable in and of itself but is only valuable insofar as it helps us achieve valuable ends or particular projects. On this view, belief-influencing strategies that violate autonomy but promote an agent’s interests would be permissible and we would have no reason to avoid them. We might prefer then aggressive advertising campaigns that deploy all sorts of nudging to convince the population not to smoke and to make better financial and health decisions.[^sunstein] I think this view of autonomy is too hasty in appealing to instrumental reasons for its value. There remains an important sense that self-governance is valuable in itself.[^buss] In sum, concerns that belief influence strategies might undermine or interfere with autonomy do not offer a knockdown case against belief influence in general but do raise several important concerns that will bear on our analysis of belief-influencing strategies.

[^sunstein]: See @thaler2008 for a fuller suite of strategies one might pursue in this vein.

[^buss]: See @buss2005, 197 for fuller discussion of why we should resist an instrumental analysis of autonomy.

### 3.3 – Identity and integrity

The third standard argument for eschewing belief influence responds to the thought that to expose our beliefs to substantial influence would threaten our ability to maintain a stable identity or maintain the integrity of our self. Our reasons to maintain these, the thought runs, outweigh reasons to expose our beliefs to influence and we should prefer minimal exposure. I will outline three contemporary versions of this approach before considering whether they succeed.

The first version, due to Albertzart, holds that because they are “internalised long term commitments, moral principles are essential for an agent’s identity and unity over time,” as well as an agent’s capacity for judgement [@albertzart2013, 346; 351 on the latter]. She sees this as giving rise to two benefits. The first that “moral principles can provide forward looking psychological connections between an agent’s present self and her future self”. This would help one with planning and pursuing in a coherent way the projects that one takes to be valuable in life. The second claimed benefit is that moral principles allow an agent to “construct and understand herself as a person” [346].

Kawall makes the more fundamental claim that beliefs held over long periods of time are constitutive of our identity and agency, arguing that “our enduring beliefs help to make us who we are as agents” and “enduring accessible beliefs are crucial to the autonomy, self-control, and authenticity of agents” [@kawall2010, 108-109]. In surveying views on the importance of personal identity and the personal integrity of self we should aspire to Kawall suggests that “[without beliefs], it seems we would be incapable of leading a life worth living—we could well lack an effective practical, personal identity” [@kawall2010, 120].

Lawlor appeals not to the putative relationship between belief and identity but the value of stability in one’s psychological and epistemic life. She thinks it is rational for anyone who values the stability of the self to seek stability in the suite of beliefs that we hold because it “enhances the epistemic functioning of the agent over the long haul” [@lawlor2014, 25]. Crucially, however, Lawler does not think that “the existence of a [belief] gives one reason to maintain it” [@lawlor2014, 25].

On the face of these three accounts we might take it that we should minimise belief influence to preserve the identity, agency and stability of self of others. But other views complicate this picture. Consider Archer, who concurs that an integrated and stable self is  valuable but argues that the reason an integrated self is valuable is “it makes people more likely to act in line with their moral judgements” [@archer2017, 436]. I think this is a persuasive reason to value integrated selves from a social perspective. It helps explain why we might have reasons relating to the moral functioning of society to prefer others to have integrated selves, rather than allow them to go on as they please, integrated or otherwise. If this is the case and we have reason to want people to act according to their moral judgements, then we might want to safeguard an integrated self and minimise belief influence. But this would cause us to end up in a tangle where we leave beliefs uninfluenced so as to safeguard the integrated self that encourages people to act in accordance with their beliefs, but we are unable to do anything about the potentially bad content of those identity-integral beliefs. The result of this would be that an egregiously morally bad person (however you conceive of them) should have their identity-integrity favoured and their beliefs unchallenged, to preserve their ability to act in accordance with their abhorrent beliefs. I remain hesitant to endorse this view.

So is the relationship between maintaining our preexisting beliefs and preserving our identity, agency and stability of self such that we should avoid influencing others’ beliefs? It is not. The mere fact that morally significant beliefs people hold are important to their identity does not grant them a claim to immunity from influence. Many non-belief parts of our personal lives including our homes, relationships, emotional lives and access to particular resources are plausibly also essential parts of our identity on Albertzart’s view. These are rightly subject to influence all of the time. Just as the place our childhood home has in forming our identity does not give reason for the government or developers to avoid redeveloping the property, the essential role belief plays in our identity does not grant it immunity from social influence. If being essential to identity qualifies some part of our life for immunity from influence then Albertzart’s view would require that we abandon almost all social influence, not just that over belief. But Kawall’s account is narrower in  that he views beliefs alone as constitutive of our identity. If it is beliefs and beliefs alone that secure an identity then surely we should minimise the extent to which we influence those beliefs. The key response to this is to point out that belief influence does not threaten the security of the Kawallian identity. Belief influence results in change, and Kawall’s account allows for change in our enduring beliefs. To assuage Kawall and Lawlor’s concerns we simply must be careful that the pace or volume of change in our beliefs does not cause the permanent breakdown of our identity. I think taking care in this regard in important, as I discuss in Section 3.7, but it does not represent a strong reason to eschew all belief influence. This is particularly true for Lawlow who is conscious that simply possessing a belief is not in itself a reason to continue holding that belief.

Agents are known to be able to function without the kind of “forward looking psychological connections between an agent’s present self and her future self” Albertzart appeals to. So while this kind of connection is no doubt valuable, it is not of such fundamental importance to our ability to function as agents that we should avoid belief influence altogether. As a final note on Albertzart’s view, gradual changes in your beliefs over time as a result of influence does not inhibit your ability to understand yourself. Indeed, understanding why your beliefs change might allow one to better appreciate who they are qua the society and individuals that are influencing them.

### 3.4 – Freedom of belief

Liberals sometimes claim that we have a political right to freedom of belief. That is, we have a right to believe what we want without impediment from the government or other actors participating in the public sphere. On this view, pursuing a strategy in the public sphere intended to change someone’s belief, as we would when running an activist political campaign or attempting to influence the health decisions of a population, might impede their right to believe as they please, and we should therefore avoid such influencing strategies. Harvey gives of one of the more persuasive formulations of a right to freedom of belief [@harvey1998, 36-42]. In short, he notes that freedom of expression is extremely important to liberal democratic societies and argues that an individual’s ability to freely express ideas and participate in liberal democratic society is, in part, contingent on their ability to hold whatever beliefs we take to be important without fear of sanction for doing so. As such, Harvey reasons, if we are to have a secure right to freedom of expression then we also must have a secure right to freedom of belief. That is, a right to believe what we want free of interference.

I would suggest three reasons that this line of argument does not amount to the strong reason to eschew belief influence that we are looking for. First, having a right to freedom of belief is not an argument against all influence. That is to say that having a political right to freedom of belief is not incompatible with being the subject of belief influence. This is because the freedom of belief required to secure freedom of expression need not be free from influence. To secure the latter in the political sense that the liberal democrat cares about requires only that our beliefs be free from government coercion. It does not require that we as individuals eschew influencing others’ beliefs. Indeed, to go further, it’s plausible that being a subject of belief influence where you are made aware of other beliefs, the arguments for them and people’s positions on those beliefs increases the number of beliefs between which you are free to select (to the extent that you can voluntarily select your beliefs). This increases the apparent freedom of your belief by enlarging the number of other options to which you have compared your belief and remained satisfied.

A second response that prevents political arguments for freedom of belief from giving strong reasons to drastically minimise belief influence is that belief influence often happens in the private sphere, outside of the scope of traditional liberal concerns. On this view, there is a range of belief-influencing behaviour that we need not, and should not, be concerned about because it takes place exclusively in the private sphere. This does not diminish the need for us to pay careful attention to issues that may arise specifically from government deployment of belief-influencing strategies (I’m thinking here of large-scale propaganda and public moral education), but it means the argument does not succeed as a reason to eschew all belief influence.

Finally, this standard argument for a political right to freedom of belief will only appeal to readers with liberal democratic sympathies. This is not to say that this will not be a substantial portion of those interested in legitimate belief influence, but it does somewhat limit the scope of the argument’s applicability.

### 3.5 – Developing rational capabilities

If adopting belief-influencing strategies proved in general to diminish or, in some relevant sense, fail to enhance rational capabilities then this might give rise to the kind of general reason to avoid belief influence that we have been looking for.

While I again agree with Etchemendy and think that belief influence strategies, and particularly the non-rational type with which he is concerned, do not give rise to a knockout reason to avoid belief influence in general, I would argue that he substantially understates the need for us to prioritise the development of rational capabilities [@etch2017, 25]. In the first instance, it should be clear that a worry about failing to develop rational capacities does not apply to all belief-influencing strategies. Persuasion, debate and many approaches to moral education rely on reasons giving and evidence presentation of the type that certainly engages our rational capabilities and aims at developing them. As such, we needn’t worry that the rational capabilities concern amounts to a general reason to avoid belief influence.

But, Etchemendy goes further to argue that we needn’t worry about non-rational strategies of belief influence undermining the development of our rational capacities. To summarise, he confines his study to belief-influencing strategies that bypass or subvert the rational capabilities of the person who is influenced, where he takes rational capabilities to be “the psychological capabilities that endow one with an ability to adjust one’s beliefs and other attitudes appropriately in light of the available reasons” [@etch2017, 6-7]. He argues that the development of our rational capabilities should be thought of as a “side effect” of the influence strategy we select to change our beliefs. Riding a bike to work would improve my fitness in a way that driving a car would not, or handwriting a thesis would improve my pace with a pen compared to typing the thesis on a computer. But in both cases the side effects—improved fitness and pace with a pen—are only reasons to prefer one of the means to a particular end. They are not reasons to discount the means without the positive side-effect from consideration. At best, Etchemendy thinks, we might have reasons to prefer rational strategies of belief influence, but the positive side effects that they have for our rational capabilities are not reasons to eschew all non-rational influence strategies.

This argument, while correct, understates the strength of the preference we should have for rational influence strategies for two reasons. First, Etchemendy understates the value of developing rational capabilities when it comes to dealing with belief. Our rational ability to engage with belief is not on to develop as a children and trust that we retain it for the rest of our lives. Developing our rational capacities to engage with reasoning must happen in response to changing doxastic norms and as different types of belief influence and modes of persuasion arise in our doxastic communities throughout the course of our lives. Consider the way the internet and aggressively targeted advertising are prominent strategies of belief influence we must rationally engage with now that were not at issue in our daily lives two decades ago. To continually improve and reinforce our rational capabilities qua belief allows us to be better participants in the doxastic community, and enables us to guard against unwanted doxastic influence. I follow Merry in thinking that it is whether or not a practice develops precisely these capabilities that distinguished legitimate moral education from indoctrination [@merry2005, 410]. I will return to this point later, but for now it serves to underscore the importance of developing rational capabilities qua belief [^adults]. So while Etchemendy’s characterisation that “the world is not one gigantic classroom” might be somewhat flippant, it remains slightly off the mark [@etch2017, 26]. Even if it is not a classroom it remains somewhere we are required to exercise rationality to navigate at all times.

[^adults]: See @rebonato2012 for a survey of psychology results that underscore for the importance of developing adult education programs to foster critical thinking in the face of the plurality of influencing factors in our lives.

Second, I think Etchemendy’s analogy of beliefs to action when comparing manual means that have developmental side-effects (riding a bike) to more efficient means (driving a car) misses the mark. Unlike bike-riding which one could live their life without ever having to learn to do, the rational engagement and development of capabilities with which it is supposedly analogous is an unavoidable part of our lives. If everyone had a strong need to ride bikes, we would likely have a widespread social investment in developing everyone’s ability to. Our widespread investment in teaching rational capabilities, at least to children, adds weight to the suggestion that we should think of these capabilities in this way. Further, we cannot and do not want to automate belief influence in the way we might want to render bikes obsolete with more efficient and safe cars. This would result in a world with far less reasons-giving persuasion that becomes overly reliant on non-rational belief influence like nudging or emotional appeals. Our ability to reason regarding belief cannot be allowed to atrophy in this way.

As such, concerns about failure to develop rational capabilities are not a general reason to eschew belief influence but they do give good pro tanto reasons to prefer rational, reasons-giving belief influence strategies when we consider the legitimacy of strategies in Chapter five.

### 3.6 – Risk of error

Etchemendy introduces what he terms the “risk-of-error” problem:

> “The biggest problem with non-rational influence is that it presents, at least in a wide range of cases, a greater risk of inducing error, where by “inducing error” I mean moving a person’s overall set of beliefs further out of alignment with an accurate and complete account of the world” [@etch2017, 4]

I want to expand Etchemendy's analysis and argue that substantial risk of error arises from belief influence strategies that do appeal to our rationality. The concern, put briefly, is that if we are broadly licensed to pursue belief-influencing strategies against others without any check on the volume or persistence of the given strategies, then individuals who are subject to belief influence will likely find the resulting rational demands extremely onerous. If we are exposed to an enormous volume of attempted rational belief influence, innumerable public reasons and a glut of proffered evidence, then it is fair to imagine one becoming overwhelmed. Put more precisely, what would occur in this circumstance is a heightened risk of two things.

First, we would be more likely to err in the beliefs that we decide on. Overwhelmed by information and influence strategies rational and non-rational, it would be increasingly difficult to weigh up which beliefs we should adopt or attempt to adopt. Think here of the number of issues we do not have firm beliefs on even when we are not the subject of explicit belief-influencing strategies. It certainly seems unlikely, given we are incapable of processing all the nuance of the beliefs being pushed on us, that the decision we come to is more likely than not to be correct.

Second, this situation would hardly be counted as one in which we are operating rationally, and seems likely to lead to fragmentation of our existing beliefs as overwhelming influences cause our suite of beliefs to be pulled in different directions. Goehlert rightly argues that information overload can restrict freedom in this way [@goehlert1980, 113].

We should worry then that too onerous demands for doxastic exposure threaten our ability to apply reason to belief and our ability to avoid fragmentation of our beliefs. (Note here the similarity with stability concerns addressed in Section 3.3.) The thought goes that we have to be able to protect ourselves from this risk and the strong answer might be eschewing all forms of influence.

My response, again, is that the risk of belief-influence leading to some bad consequences in some cases does not amount to a general reason to avoid influential practices. But I think this discussion highlights that there are strong reasons to prefer that our beliefs be influenced slowly without loss of rationality rather than risk error in rapid, overwhelmed changes. As such I recognise going forward the need to limit belief influence to prevent it being so onerous to the influenced that they are too inclined to error.

### 3.7 – Epistemic uncertainty

A passing concern that might give rise to a general reason to avoid belief influence altogether draws on an intuition my discussion hinted at in Sections 3.2 and 3.7. The thought goes that the lack of certainty about being able to successfully influence belief when we pursue a belief-influencing strategy is a good reason to avoid challenging belief. Avoiding influence altogether would mitigate this and we should prefer that.

My response would simply be that avoiding all belief influence in this manner, for the risk that well-intentioned influence strategies do not play out precisely as planned, is an impractical way to go about our doxastic lives. Beliefs can be reliably influenced (see Section 2.1), but we must accept that this occurs with differing levels of success. That is, however unfortunately, just the way that belief works. As such, the concern about epistemic uncertainty gives us reason to be cautious and perhaps consider illegitimate particularly risky belief-influencing strategies, but does not weigh against reasons to want to influence belief.

### 3.8 – The need for principles of legitimate influence

While the seven arguments I have surveyed do not succeed as general reasons to avoid belief influence, they raise an important set of concerns that will influence our discussion of what legitimates belief-influencing strategies.

There may be readers who find one or more of the arguments persuasive or my responses inadequate, and take this to mean that the remainder of my project is unnecessary: why consider the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies when we should prioritise avoiding influencing any beliefs at all? To this reader, I suggest a return to my discussion in Section 2.1 of the untold ways in which our social practices unavoidably influence the beliefs of others. There we accounted for the pervasive role that social influence of belief has in our belief formation and revision. We see this social influence play out in the formation of morally significant beliefs around us. Sarkissian puts a fine point on the folly of thinking we can escape it:

> It is chimerical to think we can effectively refrain from influencing others in our midst. We must rather accept that influencing others is part of social existence, something we bring about not solely through volitional acts but simply by being a focus of others’ attention and awareness [@sarkissian2017, 490].

Consider the way religiosity, cultural preferences and ideological tendencies are not randomly distributed among the population but cluster in communities and are inculcated in the children of those communities. This influence is constant, and our beliefs change over time. This change is an accepted part of our moral life.

It is worth noting here that a particularly hardcore doxastic voluntarist might say that the kind of social influence I am describing is not inevitable for morally significant beliefs because individuals are entirely free to form their own beliefs—they can merely elect not to adopt the beliefs of those around them. I think this objection is readily responded to by noting that, in the event that direct doxastic voluntarism is possible, decisions, while free in a strict sense, are not free from social influence. The information or evidence individuals have available to them, the manner in which it is presented and the prevailing social norms all influence the entirely doxastically voluntary agent. It is implausible to expect them to, largely a priori, arrive at a set of morally significant beliefs that are not traceable, at least in part, to their social circumstances. This is not to say that beliefs substantially contrary to moral norms don't exist. Indeed visionary progressives who anticipate dominant beliefs to come and extraordinary conservatives who would have us commit to the values of yesteryear are present in all societies.

I revisit this analysis of the inescapable reality of the doxastic influence we have on others to reiterate my point that there need not be a large amount of social influence at hand for my investigation of what legitimates belief-influencing strategies to be valuable. The reader who think that any of the concerns surveyed in this Chapter justify a general reason for eschewing all social influence will be doubly conscious of the social influence they inevitably have on others’ beliefs and will be interested in knowing how to exercise this unavoidable influence as responsibly as possible.

One might respond that it is theoretically possible to remove oneself from any doxastic community and, by living as a hermit isolated from all social life, avoid the kind of belief influence that they consider impermissible. I doubt whether this is a practical option for anyone (and wish them the very best of luck in the wilderness), but allow that this is a possible radical (albeit probably unnecessary) response to the problem of social belief influence.

I want to suggest that an advocate of drastically minimising doxastic influence will instead be interested in ensuring that what doxastic influence they cannot avoid having on others in the course of their everyday lives is regulated by some principles of doxastic responsibility. I will consider such principles for the minimally influential doxastic life in Chapter five.
