# Chapter 1
## Introduction

Our deeply-held beliefs are daily the subject of the most fiercely contested social and political debates of our time. Politicians, advertisers, terrorists, corporations, activists, friends, family, and members of our communities adopt various strategies to influence the commitments we have on moral matters. What is more, it is frequently our response to the wrongs that we see in the world to want change the beliefs of others to more closely align with those we consider correct. We think that if only we could convince the opponent of same-sex marriage that gay couples are worthy of the same legal status as straight couples, the sexist of the moral equality of all genders, or the capitalist that the labour of their workers is not merely for exploitation that the world might be a better place.

There are a wide range of belief-influencing strategies we might pursue to change another person’s morally significant beliefs. We might do everything from brainwashing holders of racist views into advocating for multiculturalism to providing a steak-loving friend with information about the cattle industry in an attempt to sway persuade them to cease eating meat. We could use emotional appeals, social shaming and threats to change beliefs. We could exploit situationist results from social psychology. Or we could mix any combination of the above and other strategies to exact what can also be termed doxastic influence. The question when faced with this suite of belief-influencing strategies is which strategies morality allows us to legitimately use. This question will be the focus of this paper.

The literature regarding the ethics of influencing others’ behaviour is as old as it is substantial. From classical accounts of autonomy to contemporary concerns about whether public health campaigns are justified in subconsciously pushing citizens towards better health choices, the legitimacy of steps we take to regulate others’ actions is well attended to. Less attention has been given to the legitimacy of practices individuals and institutions adopt to alter the beliefs of others—and whether such any such efforts should be pursued at all. Etchemendy concurs that the ethics of influence have been under-researched in this regard, while Powers’ survey of social psychological studies of influence-strategies notes that existing research tends not to consider the ethical implications of belief-influencing strategies [@etch2017, 3; @powers2007, 135].

This paper is not concerned with which beliefs we are justified in holding, or what it means to hold certain beliefs. Instead, I aim to investigate the issues in the ethics of influence that arise when you are interested in influencing others’ morally significant beliefs. I address the common intuition that there might be good reasons to think we should refrain from influencing others’ beliefs because of some unique feature of the morally significant beliefs we hold. Ultimately, I contribute three principles of responsible doxastic influence that are intended to guide our daily selection of belief-influencing strategies. My project proceeds in the following way.

Chapter 2 introduces the class of morally significant beliefs: the frequently contested beliefs that are the subject of the most significant social and political debates. I identify several features of the class that will assist our later discussion and address the the relationship between my project and the philosophy of belief. The justification of belief-influencing strategies used to influence morally significant beliefs is the focus of the remainder of the paper.

Chapter 3 responds to the intuition there are good reasons to avoid influencing morally significant beliefs. This is the type of intuition expressed by claims like “I have a right to my belief” or “don’t police my thoughts”. I consider seven possible arguments for a general reason to eschew belief influence. The arguments derive from the suggested need to respect beliefs and believers, ensure autonomy is not undermined by influence, protect constitutive elements of personal identities and the integrity of selves, secure a political right to freedom of belief, develop rational capabilities in agents, minimise the risk of inculcating incorrect beliefs, and minimise epistemic uncertainty surrounding the outcome of belief influence strategies. I find that none of these argument succeed as a general reason to eschew belief influence, but they do raise several issues to which a theory of what legitimates belief-influencing strategies must be responsive.

In Chapter 4, contra the intuitions examined in Chapter 3, I offer five reasons to favour to the active use of belief-influencing strategies. I consider the role that beliefs have in generating desired kinds of behaviour, resolving political disagreement, influencing moral calculations, and constituting the dominant beliefs of society. I also discuss the existing desirability of belief influence.

Chapter 5 addresses the special place of persuasion in the ethics of influence literature before introducing and discussing three principles of legitimate doxastic influence that should regulate our selection of belief-influencing strategies. The first principle holds that belief-influencing strategies which are coercive or manipulative in several senses I describe are illegitimate, except where they are deployed to instill in someone the rationality required to participate in the doxastic community. The second requires that we have a strong preference for rational belief-influence strategies. The third requires that we be transparent about the belief-influencing methods we deploy and, where possible, explicitly communicate our intent to influence their belief. I conclude with some discussion of how these principles would influence current doxastic practices.
