# Chapter 1
## Introduction

Our deeply-held beliefs are the subject of our most fiercely contested social and political debates. Politicians, advertisers, terrorists, corporations, activists, friends, and family adopt various strategies to influence the commitments we hold on moral matters. What is more, it is frequently our response to the wrongs we see in the world to want to change the beliefs of others to more closely align with those we consider correct. We think: if only we could convince the opponent of same-sex marriage that gay couples are worthy of the same legal status as straight couples, the sexist of the moral equality of all genders, or the capitalist that the labour of their workers is not merely for exploitation. Then the world might be a better place.

There are a wide range of belief-influencing strategies we might pursue to change another person’s morally significant beliefs, from brainwashing holders of racist views into advocating for multiculturalism, to providing a steak-loving friend with information about the cattle industry in an attempt to sway persuade them to cease eating meat. We could use emotional appeals, social shaming and threats to change beliefs. We could exploit situationist results from social psychology. Or we could mix any combination of the above and other strategies to exact what can also be termed 'doxastic influence'. The question when faced with this suite of belief-influencing strategies is: Which strategies does morality allow us to legitimately use? This question will be the focus of this paper.

The literature regarding the ethics of influencing others’ behaviour is as old as it is substantial. From classical accounts of autonomy to contemporary concerns about whether public health campaigns are justified in subconsciously pushing citizens towards better health choices, the legitimacy of steps we take to regulate others’ actions is well attended to. Less attention has been given to the legitimacy of practices individuals and institutions adopt to alter the beliefs of others—and whether such any such efforts should be pursued at all. Etchemendy concurs that the ethics of influence have been insufficiently researched in this regard, while Powers’ survey of social psychological studies of influence strategies notes that existing research tends not to consider the ethical implications of belief-influencing strategies [@etch2017, 3; @powers2007, 135].

This paper is not concerned with which beliefs we are justified in holding, or what it means to hold certain beliefs. Instead, I aim to investigate the issues in the ethics of influence that arise when you are interested in influencing others’ morally significant beliefs. I address the common intuition that there might be good reasons to think we should refrain from influencing others’ beliefs because of some unique feature of the morally significant beliefs we hold. Ultimately, I contribute three principles of legitimate doxastic influence that are intended to guide our daily selection of belief-influencing strategies. My project proceeds in the following way.

Chapter Two introduces the class of morally significant beliefs: the frequently contested beliefs that are the subject of our most significant social and political debates. I identify several features of this class that will assist our later discussion and address the relationship between my project and the philosophy of belief. The justification of belief-influencing strategies used to influence morally significant beliefs is the focus of the remainder of the paper.

Chapter Three responds to the intuition there are good reasons to avoid influencing morally significant beliefs. This is the type of intuition expressed by claims like “I have a right to my belief” or “don’t police my thoughts”. I consider seven possible arguments for a general reason to eschew belief influence. The arguments derive from the suggested need to respect beliefs and believers, ensure autonomy is not undermined by influence, protect constitutive elements of personal identities and the integrity of selves, secure a political right to freedom of belief, develop rational capabilities in agents, minimise the risk of inculcating incorrect beliefs, and minimise epistemic uncertainty surrounding the outcome of belief influence strategies. I find that none of these argument succeed as a general reason to eschew belief influence, but they do raise several issues to which a theory of what legitimates belief-influencing strategies must be responsive.

In Chapter Four, contra the intuitions examined in Chapter Three, I offer five reasons to favour to the active use of belief-influencing strategies. I consider the role that beliefs have in generating desired kinds of behaviour, resolving political disagreement, influencing moral calculations, and constituting the dominant beliefs of society. I also discuss the existing desirability of belief influence.

Chapter Five addresses the special place of persuasion in the ethics of influence literature before introducing and discussing three principles of legitimate doxastic influence that should regulate our selection of belief-influencing strategies. The first principle is that belief-influencing strategies which are coercive or manipulative in several senses I describe are illegitimate, except where they are deployed to instill in someone the rationality required to participate in the doxastic community. The second is that we have a strong preference for rational belief-influencing strategies. The third is that we be transparent about the belief-influencing methods we deploy and, where possible, explicitly communicate our intent to influence their belief.

I conclude with discussion of how these principles would influence current doxastic practices.

# Chapter 2
## Morally Significant Beliefs

This paper is concerned with the strategies an individual is justified in adopting when they want to influence another’s beliefs. This Chapter specifies the class of “morally significant beliefs” whose justified influence we are interested in, identifies features of the class that will assist with our later discussion and addresses the relationship of the project to the philosophy of belief.

Most simply, your morally significant beliefs are the moral and value judgements and other moral commitments you have made that are likely to be contested by others. I intend the class to capture the moral beliefs that we often feel we ought to try to change in others. That is, the most common and significant sources of disagreement; those beliefs that from time to time (or all too often) find themselves at the centre of social and political debates.

The central beliefs that count as morally significant on this account are reasonably intuitive to grasp. Statements such as “gay couples ought not to have the same legal status as straight couples owing to their sexual orientation”, “all people should be maximally free and equal and a society’s institutions should reflect this”, “abortion is wrong”, “white people are morally superior to others and are thus deserving of greater rights”, “a transcendent god exists and their followers teachings are the only true source of moral judgements”, “climate change is fake” and “vaccines cause autism in children and are thereby morally wrong” all express paradigmatic examples of morally significant beliefs.

While I hope the beliefs just listed intuitively bear a group relation, it should be emphasised that there are a variety of different features of these beliefs that give them moral significance. Some like “gay couples ought not to have the same legal status as straight couples owing to their sexual orientation” or "abortion is wrong" are morally significant because they make moral judgements. Others are empirical claims that are not in themselves morally significant but gain moral significance because of their consequences. "Pollution harms the environment we value and is therefore wrong" is this kind of belief. That pollution harms the environment is an empirical claim. It gains moral significance because people take the consequences of the empirical fact to have normative implications. Including both types of beliefs captures, I think, the kind of deeply-held moral commitments that tend to give rise to claims that certain beliefs should be immune from criticism or influence. I will consider these claims at length in Chapter three.

While the example beliefs cited are all the subject of substantial contemporary disagreement, this disagreement is not a necessary condition for a belief to be morally significant. What is morally significant, and the magnitude of a belief’s significance is socially and culturally determined, a point I will expand on shortly.

Allow me to point out a few features of the class of morally significant beliefs which will be important to our later discussion.

First, both direct moral judgements and empirical judgements with moral consequences are included. A direct moral judgement does not rely on any empirical claim, and generally takes the form "X is instrinsically good/bad". Consider a racist’s view that people of colour are innately undeserving of the same moral status as white people. This belief makes no empirical claim. By contrast, a belief like “vaccines cause autism in children and are thereby morally wrong” does make an empirical claim. This second type of belief is generally of the form "X is instrumentally good/bad because of its good/bad consequences". It is important we include both types of beliefs in the scope of our discussion because both feature heavily in contemporary debates, particularly when the moral consequences of empirical claims are at issue, as in debates about vaccines, climate change, and gun control. Further, it is often unclear whether someone’s belief is contingent on an empirical claim or not. It is easy to imagine the racist’s belief mentioned just now framed not as "people of colour are innately undeserving of the same moral status as white people", but "I believe that crime statistics warrant my belief that people of colour are innately undeserving of the same moral status as white people". Such slippage between direct moral judgement and empirical judgement with moral consequences is common enough that we are best to consider both as morally significant beliefs. Note also that the two types of beliefs are likely to be responsive to different types of belief-influence that we will discuss in Chapter five: it is a very different thing to give someone evidence for your belief in the science and positive public health function of vaccines than it is to give reasons for your belief in an omnipotent god.

Second, religious beliefs are included in the class of morally significant beliefs. Their inclusion should be uncontroversial. Religious beliefs are precisely the type of deeply-held but regularly contested belief that will occupy the focus of our discussion. Consideration of religious belief is of particular use to our study because religious adherents often claim that no interpersonal belief-influencing strategy could possibly influence their faith beliefs [@buchak2017, 115]. (I will return to claims of uninfluencable belief later) Finally, religion also offers one of the clearest examples of an individual motivated to influence others’ beliefs: the evangelist.

Third, what counts as a morally significant belief clearly changes over time and is culturally and socially located. Moral norms and the authority of the Catholic Church were once such that the belief that the earth revolved around the sun was an empirical claim of extreme moral significance. Now, of course, what was Galileo’s loss is our gain. It is not just morally permissible to be a heliocentrist, it is difficult to conceive of the issue as a moral one at all. As such, I keep open that what counts as a morally significant belief might be the subject of as much contest as the beliefs themselves. This means our account of legitimate belief-influencing strategies must be responsive to changing moral norms.

An important corollary of morally significant beliefs' cultural and social location is the temporal contingency of the popularity of a particular belief in different communities. The moral beliefs of the early suffragettes or slavery abolitionists were at one time far from the most commonly held beliefs about voting and slavery in their respective societies, but those beliefs are dominant today. I argue that we want our doxastic practices to be such that moral beliefs are able to make the same passage from the margins to the centre of our moral lives, just as the rights of women to vote and all people to freedom did. One might consider that demanding any less of our belief-influencing practices risks closing our moral community off to progress. As I will argue in Chapter four, avoiding this risk is a good reason to allow for substantial interpersonal influence of belief.

For now it is sufficient to note that the manner in which moral beliefs are held by different proportions of society over time gives rise to two claims. First, there is the claim of the exasperated climate scientist, who faced once more with the demand to reconsider the conclusions of their widely-accepted research, says to the climate denialist, “my belief that you consider morally significant is so widely accepted that it should not be up for debate”. A second claim that arises proceeds something like this: “My moral belief that polyamorous relationships should enjoy the same legal rights as monogamous couples is currently marginal. I don’t want it’s current unpopularity to prevent it from becoming a common moral belief, and I want to distinguish it from other unpopular moral beliefs that have been discarded by my moral community.” The interests in these claims are prima facie somewhat opposed. The former hopes that the popularity of a morally significant belief grants it special reprieve from contest and constant justification. The latter hopes that the present unpopularity of their morally significant belief does not prevent it from becoming the more common belief. A successful account of legitimate belief-influence will manage these competing interests.

### 2.1 – Three claims about belief

One might rightly point out, at this juncture, that I have not yet given an account of what belief is, nor have I grounded my class of morally significant beliefs by staking positions in the usual range of ontological and epistemic questions that concern the philosophy of belief. I have avoided making such commitments for three reasons. First, this paper is concerned with the justification of interpersonal belief-influencing strategies. Consideration of what precisely belief consists in or its logical structure are regrettably outside the scope of this project. Second, the question of justification that this project is concerned with depends less on what belief consists in and more on what we take to be its moral status. That is to say, if you are satisfied that the class of morally significant beliefs that I have sketched indeed outlines something of moral significance, and you are satisfied that there are somewhat reliable strategies for influencing the members of that class, then those are sufficient grounds to motivate consideration of the justification of belief-influencing strategies. Third, an account of justified interpersonal belief-influence that does not depend on just one account of the nature and ethics of beliefs and instead is compatible with many will be more widely acceptable to philosophers of belief. I intend to offer a broadly acceptable account of justified interpersonal belief-influence and take this breadth to be an appealing feature of my approach.

To defend this approach, I want to make explicit the three minimal claims I make about the nature of belief in this paper and assess where this leaves me with regard to standard positions in the philosophy of belief. The three claims are:

1. There are moral judgements and beliefs of the type I have termed morally significant beliefs which play an important role in our moral lives.
2. These moral judgements and beliefs can be more or less reliably influenced by a variety of strategies.
3. These moral judgements are to some extent perceptible in and reportable by individuals.

These claims accommodate the most common views in the literature, but cannot hope to allow for them all. I will address each claim and a few concerns in turn.

The first claim is, I take it, reasonably uncontroversial. One might object that the class of morally significant beliefs encompasses too many elements that should not be addressed together. You might think, for instance, that morally significant empirical claims should not be grouped with direct moral judgements and that more care should have been taken to acknowledge and delineate between affective and cognitive components of moral beliefs. These categorisation concerns are important, but not for this project. In the first instance, I reiterate that a belief or moral judgement’s membership of the class of morally significant beliefs does not depend on what one considers belief to consist in. The class merely marks out the range of beliefs that will be of particular interest to our discussion of justified belief-influence and notes several features of this range. The members of the class need not all be of the same kind. Indeed, my account allows that the members of the morally significant belief class could be a mix of cognitive and affective judgements, various attitudes and empirical claims—and any mix thereof. Second, I maintain that my account of morally significant beliefs does capture an intuitively graspable set of beliefs that are held, professed and reflected in actions in the real world. If this is the case, my discussion has captured something worth studying.

Am I right in claiming that beliefs can be influenced? The short answer is yes, the morally significant class that we are interested in can be. But more needs to be said about how and by whom morally significant beliefs can be influenced. In general, beliefs divide into three categories qua being influencable. First, there are some beliefs that cannot be influenced. The paradigmatic case here is perceptual beliefs. No matter what is said to me or what kind of duress I am under, when the sun is shining out that window and I am looking out the window I will be unable to believe anything other than that the sun is shining.[^delusions] Second, there are beliefs people report cannot be influenced. Religious believers who find and report that their faith in a particular god is absolutely unshakeable populate this category, along with individuals who have attempted to change a belief that they hold and have been unable to do so. These cases will be instructive for later discussion regarding respecting belief. Finally, there are those beliefs that can be influenced. These include the bulk of moral and value judgements which are part of the morally significant beliefs class.

[^delusions]: This is not necessarily true when we allow that I might have delusions or have my perception otherwise interfered with, but I leave this aside for the sake of brevity.

A variety of processes are known to reliably—that is, with some consistency—influence our beliefs. In addition to reasons-giving persuasion, the archetypal method of belief influence, other targeted strategies can influence our moral beliefs. Consider, for example, the use of emotionally-charged image in moral arguments, and the use of results from behavioural psychology studies to “nudge” our approach to moral decisions [@kelland2015; @thaler2008]. The legitimacy of alternate belief-influencing strategies like these is the primary concern of this paper. But it would be a mischaracterisation to suggest that our beliefs are primarily formed and influenced by persuasion and other targeted strategies. Both standard rationalist and intuitionist accounts of moral judgement allow that social influence plays a large role in the mechanisms through which we influence the morally significant beliefs of others, and through which our own are influenced [@haidt2001, 828]. Fârte gives a clear account of how this social belief influence operates [@farte2016; @liu2014]. I endorse McMyler’s analysis of the manner in which belief can be influenced by coercion, albeit in a different manner to the coercion of action [@mcmyler2011, 556]. McMyler identifies two types of doxastic coercion. “Indirect doxastic coercion” occurs when a threat is issued which becomes the reason to act to bring about the belief. For example, a teacher threatens detention to cause a student to do their civics homework, thereby bringing about a belief in the importance of voting. “Compelled doxastic coercion” occurs when a sanction compels belief-acquisition over time. An example of a belief changed by compelled doxastic coercion would be an individual finding their belief in the moral importance of vegetarianism changed over time because that belief caused their friendship circle to exclude them [@mcmyler2011, 554-555].

In the preceeding examples of belief influence the strategies discussed have been such that an individual, organisation or the state might wield them against another individual—they are other directed. But do individuals have voluntary control over their moral beliefs? That is, do individuals have direct or indirect voluntary doxastic control? The literature approaches consensus that we do have indirect doxastic control, that “subjects have control over factors that influence what they believe rather than control over those beliefs themselves” [@peels2014, 694]. This allows me to pursue strategies like attempting to form relationships with a wide range of people if I hope to inculcate a belief in the the moral value of diverse communities. Other examples include watching documentaries to learn about inequality, otherwise researching a morally significant subject or electing to participate in discussion of morally significant issues. There is far more ongoing disagreement regarding direct doxastic voluntarism. [^voluntarist]

[^voluntarist]: See @nottelmann2017 against direct doxastic voluntarism, and @alston1989 for the positions classical statement. Cf. @steup2017.

Must I, then, commit myself to a position on voluntarism? After all, whether individuals have direct control over their beliefs greatly changes the legitimacy of persuasion and reasons-giving belief-influencing strategies. While it is certainly true the outcome of the voluntarism debate will likely affect our legitimacy assessments to some degree, the key insight for our project is that, as noted already, persuasion-based belief influence reliably works to change belief. This could mean that beliefs _are_ subject to voluntary control, or beliefs are not subject to voluntary control but are evidence-responsive in some seemingly predictable way (after all we persuade knowing what view successful persuasion will likely result in the persuadee obtaining), or that beliefs are not subject to the will at all but there is some feature of persuasion that still causes them to change. Because what we are primarily interested in is belief influence, we need not, then, take a position on voluntarism. We should, however, have appropriate regard for the effect different answers to the direct voluntarism question will have on our discussion of legitimate belief-influencing strategies in Chapter five.

The third claim I made about belief was that morally significant beliefs are to some extent perceptible in and reportable by individuals. By this I mean that we are able to discern that individuals hold morally significant beliefs, or individuals are able to report verbally or otherwise that they hold particular beliefs. This phrasing sets an intentionally low standard which admits some doubt about the beliefs we suppose others hold. While questions regarding the precise attribution of belief—what counts as holding a belief, to what extent do we have epistemic access to others' beliefs, whether verbal reports or a record of action should be considered the marker where the two conflict—are valuable in general, their answers are not crucial to the success of this project. This is because the kind of belief-influencing strategy whose justification we are interested in can be deployed for a variety of reasons without requiring the belief that they may influence away be certainly present in the influenced individual. Consider a child raised watching their parent’s behaviour who eventually forms the view that their parent is racist. Consider another child who became aware of their parent’s racism when their parent informs them of their beliefs. Finally, consider a child who has never heard their parent act or report in a way that betrays their racism. If each of these children begins to pursue belief-influencing strategies aimed at inculcating a belief in the moral equality of all races in their parent, then their project is the same positive one aimed at introducing a belief to their parent. Their project's justification prima facie does not depend on the strength or truth of observations that lead to its inception. The worst case scenario is that one (likely the third) or more of the parents are being influenced to believe something they already believe.

In this Section, I've suggested there is an intuitively graspable class of beliefs that are morally significant. I've gone to some lengths to indicate the scope of this class and noted that it does not need to be narrowly defined for the success of this project. I have identified several features of morally significant beliefs that will inform our later discussion and explicated the three minimal claims my project makes regarding belief.

# Chapter 3
## Should we avoid influencing beliefs?

This Chapter will look closely at the precise claim people might be making when they say “I have a right to my beliefs”.

It is common enough to hear someone faced with attempts to have their beliefs on some moral matter influenced say “well, I have a right to my beliefs”. I suspect many people would feel that this statement gets something right about the extent to which our beliefs should be exposed to influence. Further, I think many people would consider some “right to my beliefs” to apply with particular strength to deeply-held morally significant beliefs. They might think that religious beliefs or deep commitments to values that guide the course of moral lives should not have to be open to influence by just any old person with a different belief and the will to try to impress it upon others.

We should take this set of intuitions seriously, if only because it appears that something like these thoughts is an operational principle in many people’s everyday doxastic practices. But it is not immediately clear what exactly the thought “some or all of my beliefs should to some extent be immune from influence” or the claim “I have a right for my beliefs to go uninfluenced” consists in.

I think there are seven standard ways someone might try to justify these types of intuitions or otherwise argue that there exists a general reason to refrain from influencing others’ beliefs. These arguments derive from concerns about the need to

1. Respect beliefs and believers,
2. Ensure autonomy is not undermined by influence,
3. Protect constitutive elements of personal identities and the integrity of selves,
4. Secure a political right to freedom of belief,
5. Develop rational capabilities,
6. Minimise the risk of inculcating incorrect beliefs, and
7. Minimise epistemic uncertainty surrounding the outcome of belief influence strategies.

I will consider each argument in turn and ask whether they give a good reason to refrain in part or whole from influencing others’ beliefs. On some of these points (Sections 3.2, 3.5 and 3.6) I take up Matthew Etchemendy’s recent analysis of reasons to avoid non-rational belief influence, enlarge his project to consider belief influence in general, and take issue with his conclusions regarding legitimate belief-influence in anticipation of our discussion in Chapter five [@etch2017]. I conclude that none of the seven reasons offer a strong reason to eschew all belief influence. Several suggest reasons for concern about the legitimacy of belief influence strategies with particular features. These concerns will need to be weighed against the positive reasons for pursuing belief-influence that I discuss in Chapter four. I conclude this Section by considering how ethicists of belief committed to influence minimisation should approach the reality of everyday social belief influence.

### 3.1 – Respect

There are several ways in which a claim that we are required to respect the morally significant beliefs of others and thereby refrain from influencing those beliefs might be made out. First, when people claim that their beliefs should be respected, I would venture that they are sometimes asking that the important social and psychological roles that their beliefs play be respected. A more formal argument in support of this view might proceed as follows. We value our beliefs and the beliefs of others for two reasons. In the first instance, they play a central role in our daily cognitive life and our actions. They act as a store of (in some loose sense) predetermined positions on matters that allow us to navigate the world efficiently. They also guide how we conceive of the good and shape which projects we take to be worth pursuing in life. Second, beliefs play an equally important role in our discourse as a society. Society is frequently discussed in terms of moral values (“the fair go”), and we memorialise moral beliefs people held (“she always believed in equality”). The two central roles that moral beliefs play in our lives, the thought goes, mean that our morally significant beliefs are not to be haphazardly tampered with. The practical and psychological roles that our beliefs play mean they should be accorded greater respect. If this argument holds, what would one have to do to disrespect moral beliefs and the role they play? I think the proponent of this view would suggest that moral beliefs are disrespected when you undermine the social and psychological functions they serve.

Our question becomes, then, whether belief influence undermines the valued psychological and social place of belief. I do not think that it does. I will address the psychological role that belief plays in greater detail when I consider whether the importance of beliefs to our identity or integrity of self amounts to a reason to avoid belief influence, but suffice to say for now I do not think that is the case. We have been raised as subjects of belief influence and every day weather attempts by governments, advertisers, friends and other parties to influence our beliefs. If the valuable role that our beliefs play in our personal psychological lives survive this on a daily basis, it is implausible to say that respecting this role requires that we eschew all belief influence. On the note of belief's social role, I submit that part of this role is to be exposed to influence. Beliefs play a prominent role in society’s discussion of their self-conception precisely because we understand that beliefs change and we seek to have them examined, influenced and confirmed. It makes no sense to think then that we should avoid influencing beliefs in order to respect the social role that they play.

A second way a need to respect beliefs might be argued for is by pointing to some feature of belief practices that, in general, makes attempting to influence belief a bad idea. A proponent of this view would likely argue that the chance many of our most deeply-held beliefs are wrong makes influencing beliefs disrespectful. That we are likely incorrect in many of our own beliefs is, I think, a reasonable inference to make from the number of people around us whose rationality we respect and whose social influences we are aware of but who have arrived at different beliefs on important moral matters. This being true, it would be foolhardy to attempt to influence the beliefs of others to match your own when, despite feeling otherwise, you lack certainty that your beliefs are correct. We should accord the beliefs of others the respect we give our own beliefs we believe to be correct. Or, to put it another way, we should respect the beliefs of others in case they prove to be right. As such, the thought goes, we should eschew opportunities to influence others’ beliefs.

I think this argument is valuable for emphasising that there is a _prima facie_ relationship between our degree of confidence in our beliefs and the extent to which we feel justified in attempting to inculcate those beliefs in others. Again, however, the argument does not amount to a general reason to avoid belief influence. There is naturally a great deal of epistemic uncertainty in the truth of beliefs that we hold. But I want to suggest that confidence in a belief is not an appropriate candidate for what in part justifies attempting to inculcate others with a belief. If this were the case, religious adherents, ideological zealots who are impervious to reason and holders of delusions would have a free pass to the legitimacy of the belief-influencing strategies that they deploy, while thoroughgoing rational people with an appropriate level of doubt about the truth of their beliefs would lack justification.

The thought that we owe respect to beliefs and believers underscores the emotional and procedural significance that moral beliefs have in real lives. While respecting these beliefs does not necessitate that we refrain from influencing them, the arguments offered suggest there is good reason to be sensitive to the way beliefs are valued socially when considering their influence.

I have thoroughly considered whether according appropriate respect to persons or beliefs in and of themselves requires that we minimise our influence over others' beliefs. I now want to make the more basic observation that the prominence of some need to respect the beliefs of others in our intuitions about moral beliefs is a norm that is by no means universally shared. By this I mean to observe that social practice in many doxastic communities frequently do not require us to respect belief. Some communities simply do not have this among their doxastic norms. Others seem to consider specific morally significant beliefs fringe enough to be safely derided by particular Sections of the community. Think of the young atheist’s attitude toward life-long religious adherents or contemporary conservatives who deride the “politically correct left”.

This is all to say that there are other intuitions that compete with the sense that we should respect beliefs. In particular the intuition that we should let people believe what they want to believe so long as they don't behave in accordance with beliefs whose expressions are harmful runs up against the intuition that we resent and want to reform someone who holds beliefs we find objectionable. The former intuition suggests that we should allow a lifelong sexist who has learned not to behave in a sexist manner to maintain their sexist beliefs unhindered. The latter intuition suggests that we are right to resent and want to reform the beliefs of someone we know to be sexist even though they don’t behave in a sexist manner. We have given considerable thought to the former intuition, but less to the latter. As our discussion turns to the positive justification of belief influence in Chapter four, it will be valuable to bear the latter intuition in mind.

### 3.2 – Autonomy

After appeals to respect belief or believers, protecting agents’ autonomy is a standard reason for thinking that we should avoid acting to influence agents’ beliefs. The rough sense is that allowing belief influence would amount to allowing others to control your thoughts, and that such control undermines the autonomy or self-governance that we usually take to be valuable. Buss puts the worry about violating autonomy elegantly when she asks

> If there are limitations on how we can justifiably treat one another, then isn’t this, in part, because, independent of our more particular concerns, it is a good thing for each of us to determine our own will? [@buss2005, 196]

Taking care not to violate autonomy will prove to be an important condition for the legitimacy of a belief-influencing strategy, and I will defend this condition at greater length in Chapter five. For now, I need only show that belief-influencing strategies do not, in general, violate autonomy in such a way as to justify avoiding pursuing them at all.

Autonomy as a concept enjoys the rare distinction in philosophical literature (perhaps alongside justice) of having so many and varied accounts of what it is or what it consists in that the term itself tells us little about the view being proffered. Brevity regrettably dictates that I cannot engage in an exhaustive analysis of different accounts of autonomy and their implications for my project. Etchemendy does an able job of identifying the senses in which people value autonomy which are relevant to the intuition that we should eschew non-rational belief-influencing strategies [@etch2017, 16-22]. I will take up each of these in turn and consider this Chapter’s question of whether they offer a strong general reason to eschew belief influence.

On the first general view of autonomy, one is autonomous if they answer yes to the question “Could the person still do what she wanted to do if she wanted to do something different than she actually does, or would somebody stop her?” [@etch2017, 18] Concerns about belief-influencing strategies undermining this type of autonomy do not pose a general reason to avoid influencing belief because such strategies can conceivably harm and enhance this type of autonomy in different situations. For instance, you could be brainwashed into believing that you should give away all of your worldly possessions and find your ability to do differently undermined. Conversely, persuasion by knowledgeable others could influence you to believe that there are more morally valuable career options available to you. Hence there is no general reason to avoid influence strategies on this view of autonomy.

A second standard way of framing autonomy is that we have autonomy when we psychologically self-determine or “control the content of one’s own mind” [@etch2017, 18]. This conception of autonomy does not give rise to a general reason to avoid belief influence because we frequently fail to have control over the content of our minds without feeling that our autonomy has been violated. I do not choose to believe the sun is shining when I look out the window and find that it is shining. Nor do I have control over that belief entering in my mind. Yet we would not feel that my autonomy has been violated in an ethically significant way. Moreover, regarding the ethics of beliefs, I think we ought to be wary of the idea of people controlling the contents of their own mind in too strong a sense. We would not prefer, I think, that people be able to freely choose to hold beliefs that are utter contrary to evidence and reason.

We might find more appealing, then, the third view that we are autonomous if our beliefs are the product of _our_ reasoning not that of others. Again, this view of autonomy does not give a general reason to eschew belief influence, this time because it is hard to conceive of our reasoning as realistically entirely independent of social reasoning and an epistemic community: at some point our evidence and epistemic practices are socially influenced. It makes no sense, then, to view explicit strategies of belief influence that appeal to an agent’s rationality as undermining autonomy, while allowing substantial influence over beliefs to take indirectly without explicit intention and not think this undermines autonomy.

A final standard conception of autonomy to consider holds roughly that we are autonomous when we act rationally. Subscribers to this view would be comfortable with belief influence strategies that engage an agent’s rationality, but wary of less overt strategies like nudging or emotional appeals. For now, it is enough to note that someone committed to this view of autonomy would be okay with rational belief-influencing strategies, and as such this view of autonomy does not give rise to a general reason to avoid belief influence.

I should note that a possible general response to concerns about autonomy would be to argue that autonomy is not valuable in and of itself but is only valuable insofar as it helps us achieve valuable ends or particular projects. On this view, belief-influencing strategies that violate autonomy but promote an agent’s interests would be permissible and we would have no reason to avoid them. We might prefer then aggressive advertising campaigns that deploy all sorts of nudging to convince the population not to smoke and to make better financial and health decisions.[^sunstein] I think this view of autonomy is too hasty in appealing to instrumental reasons for its value. There remains an important sense that self-governance is valuable in itself.[^buss] In sum, concerns that belief influence strategies might undermine or interfere with autonomy do not offer a knockdown case against belief influence in general but do raise several important concerns that will bear on our analysis of belief-influencing strategies.

[^sunstein]: See @thaler2008 for a fuller suite of strategies one might pursue in this vein.

[^buss]: See @buss2005, 197 for fuller discussion of why we should resist an instrumental analysis of autonomy.

### 3.3 – Identity and integrity

The third standard argument for eschewing belief influence responds to the thought that to expose our beliefs to substantial influence would threaten our ability to maintain a stable identity or maintain the integrity of our self. Our reasons to maintain these, the thought runs, outweigh reasons to expose our beliefs to influence and we should prefer minimal exposure. I will outline three contemporary versions of this approach before considering whether they succeed.

The first version, due to Albertzart, holds that because they are “internalised long term commitments, moral principles are essential for an agent’s identity and unity over time,” as well as an agent’s capacity for judgement [@albertzart2013, 346; 351 on the latter]. She sees this as giving rise to two benefits. The first that “moral principles can provide forward looking psychological connections between an agent’s present self and her future self”. This would help one with planning and pursuing in a coherent way the projects that one takes to be valuable in life. The second claimed benefit is that moral principles allow an agent to “construct and understand herself as a person” [346].

Kawall makes the more fundamental claim that beliefs held over long periods of time are constitutive of our identity and agency, arguing that “our enduring beliefs help to make us who we are as agents” and “enduring accessible beliefs are crucial to the autonomy, self-control, and authenticity of agents” [@kawall2010, 108-109]. In surveying views on the importance of personal identity and the personal integrity of self we should aspire to Kawall suggests that “[without beliefs], it seems we would be incapable of leading a life worth living—we could well lack an effective practical, personal identity” [@kawall2010, 120].

Lawlor appeals not to the putative relationship between belief and identity but the value of stability in one’s psychological and epistemic life. She thinks it is rational for anyone who values the stability of the self to seek stability in the suite of beliefs that we hold because it “enhances the epistemic functioning of the agent over the long haul” [@lawlor2014, 25]. Crucially, however, Lawler does not think that “the existence of a [belief] gives one reason to maintain it” [@lawlor2014, 25].

On the face of these three accounts we might take it that we should minimise belief influence to preserve the identity, agency and stability of self of others. But other views complicate this picture. Consider Archer, who concurs that an integrated and stable self is  valuable but argues that the reason an integrated self is valuable is “it makes people more likely to act in line with their moral judgements” [@archer2017, 436]. I think this is a persuasive reason to value integrated selves from a social perspective. It helps explain why we might have reasons relating to the moral functioning of society to prefer others to have integrated selves, rather than allow them to go on as they please, integrated or otherwise. If this is the case and we have reason to want people to act according to their moral judgements, then we might want to safeguard an integrated self and minimise belief influence. But this would cause us to end up in a tangle where we leave beliefs uninfluenced so as to safeguard the integrated self that encourages people to act in accordance with their beliefs, but we are unable to do anything about the potentially bad content of those identity-integral beliefs. The result of this would be that an egregiously morally bad person (however you conceive of them) should have their identity-integrity favoured and their beliefs unchallenged, to preserve their ability to act in accordance with their abhorrent beliefs. I remain hesitant to endorse this view.

So is the relationship between maintaining our preexisting beliefs and preserving our identity, agency and stability of self such that we should avoid influencing others’ beliefs? It is not. The mere fact that morally significant beliefs people hold are important to their identity does not grant them a claim to immunity from influence. Many non-belief parts of our personal lives including our homes, relationships, emotional lives and access to particular resources are plausibly also essential parts of our identity on Albertzart’s view. These are rightly subject to influence all of the time. Just as the place our childhood home has in forming our identity does not give reason for the government or developers to avoid redeveloping the property, the essential role belief plays in our identity does not grant it immunity from social influence. If being essential to identity qualifies some part of our life for immunity from influence then Albertzart’s view would require that we abandon almost all social influence, not just that over belief. But Kawall’s account is narrower in  that he views beliefs alone as constitutive of our identity. If it is beliefs and beliefs alone that secure an identity then surely we should minimise the extent to which we influence those beliefs. The key response to this is to point out that belief influence does not threaten the security of the Kawallian identity. Belief influence results in change, and Kawall’s account allows for change in our enduring beliefs. To assuage Kawall and Lawlor’s concerns we simply must be careful that the pace or volume of change in our beliefs does not cause the permanent breakdown of our identity. I think taking care in this regard in important, as I discuss in Section 3.7, but it does not represent a strong reason to eschew all belief influence. This is particularly true for Lawlow who is conscious that simply possessing a belief is not in itself a reason to continue holding that belief.

Agents are known to be able to function without the kind of “forward looking psychological connections between an agent’s present self and her future self” Albertzart appeals to. So while this kind of connection is no doubt valuable, it is not of such fundamental importance to our ability to function as agents that we should avoid belief influence altogether. As a final note on Albertzart’s view, gradual changes in your beliefs over time as a result of influence does not inhibit your ability to understand yourself. Indeed, understanding why your beliefs change might allow one to better appreciate who they are qua the society and individuals that are influencing them.

### 3.4 – Freedom of belief

Liberals sometimes claim that we have a political right to freedom of belief. That is, we have a right to believe what we want without impediment from the government or other actors participating in the public sphere. On this view, pursuing a strategy in the public sphere intended to change someone’s belief, as we would when running an activist political campaign or attempting to influence the health decisions of a population, might impede their right to believe as they please, and we should therefore avoid such influencing strategies. Harvey gives of one of the more persuasive formulations of a right to freedom of belief [@harvey1998, 36-42]. In short, he notes that freedom of expression is extremely important to liberal democratic societies and argues that an individual’s ability to freely express ideas and participate in liberal democratic society is, in part, contingent on their ability to hold whatever beliefs we take to be important without fear of sanction for doing so. As such, Harvey reasons, if we are to have a secure right to freedom of expression then we also must have a secure right to freedom of belief. That is, a right to believe what we want free of interference.

I would suggest three reasons that this line of argument does not amount to the strong reason to eschew belief influence that we are looking for. First, having a right to freedom of belief is not an argument against all influence. That is to say that having a political right to freedom of belief is not incompatible with being the subject of belief influence. This is because the freedom of belief required to secure freedom of expression need not be free from influence. To secure the latter in the political sense that the liberal democrat cares about requires only that our beliefs be free from government coercion. It does not require that we as individuals eschew influencing others’ beliefs. Indeed, to go further, it’s plausible that being a subject of belief influence where you are made aware of other beliefs, the arguments for them and people’s positions on those beliefs increases the number of beliefs between which you are free to select (to the extent that you can voluntarily select your beliefs). This increases the apparent freedom of your belief by enlarging the number of other options to which you have compared your belief and remained satisfied.

A second response that prevents political arguments for freedom of belief from giving strong reasons to drastically minimise belief influence is that belief influence often happens in the private sphere, outside of the scope of traditional liberal concerns. On this view, there is a range of belief-influencing behaviour that we need not, and should not, be concerned about because it takes place exclusively in the private sphere. This does not diminish the need for us to pay careful attention to issues that may arise specifically from government deployment of belief-influencing strategies (I’m thinking here of large-scale propaganda and public moral education), but it means the argument does not succeed as a reason to eschew all belief influence.

Finally, this standard argument for a political right to freedom of belief will only appeal to readers with liberal democratic sympathies. This is not to say that this will not be a substantial portion of those interested in legitimate belief influence, but it does somewhat limit the scope of the argument’s applicability.

### 3.5 – Developing rational capabilities

If adopting belief-influencing strategies proved in general to diminish or, in some relevant sense, fail to enhance rational capabilities then this might give rise to the kind of general reason to avoid belief influence that we have been looking for.

While I again agree with Etchemendy and think that belief influence strategies, and particularly the non-rational type with which he is concerned, do not give rise to a knockout reason to avoid belief influence in general, I would argue that he substantially understates the need for us to prioritise the development of rational capabilities [@etch2017, 25]. In the first instance, it should be clear that a worry about failing to develop rational capacities does not apply to all belief-influencing strategies. Persuasion, debate and many approaches to moral education rely on reasons giving and evidence presentation of the type that certainly engages our rational capabilities and aims at developing them. As such, we needn’t worry that the rational capabilities concern amounts to a general reason to avoid belief influence.

But, Etchemendy goes further to argue that we needn’t worry about non-rational strategies of belief influence undermining the development of our rational capacities. To summarise, he confines his study to belief-influencing strategies that bypass or subvert the rational capabilities of the person who is influenced, where he takes rational capabilities to be “the psychological capabilities that endow one with an ability to adjust one’s beliefs and other attitudes appropriately in light of the available reasons” [@etch2017, 6-7]. He argues that the development of our rational capabilities should be thought of as a “side effect” of the influence strategy we select to change our beliefs. Riding a bike to work would improve my fitness in a way that driving a car would not, or handwriting a thesis would improve my pace with a pen compared to typing the thesis on a computer. But in both cases the side effects—improved fitness and pace with a pen—are only reasons to prefer one of the means to a particular end. They are not reasons to discount the means without the positive side-effect from consideration. At best, Etchemendy thinks, we might have reasons to prefer rational strategies of belief influence, but the positive side effects that they have for our rational capabilities are not reasons to eschew all non-rational influence strategies.

This argument, while correct, understates the strength of the preference we should have for rational influence strategies for two reasons. First, Etchemendy understates the value of developing rational capabilities when it comes to dealing with belief. Our rational ability to engage with belief is not on to develop as a children and trust that we retain it for the rest of our lives. Developing our rational capacities to engage with reasoning must happen in response to changing doxastic norms and as different types of belief influence and modes of persuasion arise in our doxastic communities throughout the course of our lives. Consider the way the internet and aggressively targeted advertising are prominent strategies of belief influence we must rationally engage with now that were not at issue in our daily lives two decades ago. To continually improve and reinforce our rational capabilities qua belief allows us to be better participants in the doxastic community, and enables us to guard against unwanted doxastic influence. I follow Merry in thinking that it is whether or not a practice develops precisely these capabilities that distinguished legitimate moral education from indoctrination [@merry2005, 410]. I will return to this point later, but for now it serves to underscore the importance of developing rational capabilities qua belief [^adults]. So while Etchemendy’s characterisation that “the world is not one gigantic classroom” might be somewhat flippant, it remains slightly off the mark [@etch2017, 26]. Even if it is not a classroom it remains somewhere we are required to exercise rationality to navigate at all times.

[^adults]: See @rebonato2012 for a survey of psychology results that underscore for the importance of developing adult education programs to foster critical thinking in the face of the plurality of influencing factors in our lives.

Second, I think Etchemendy’s analogy of beliefs to action when comparing manual means that have developmental side-effects (riding a bike) to more efficient means (driving a car) misses the mark. Unlike bike-riding which one could live their life without ever having to learn to do, the rational engagement and development of capabilities with which it is supposedly analogous is an unavoidable part of our lives. If everyone had a strong need to ride bikes, we would likely have a widespread social investment in developing everyone’s ability to. Our widespread investment in teaching rational capabilities, at least to children, adds weight to the suggestion that we should think of these capabilities in this way. Further, we cannot and do not want to automate belief influence in the way we might want to render bikes obsolete with more efficient and safe cars. This would result in a world with far less reasons-giving persuasion that becomes overly reliant on non-rational belief influence like nudging or emotional appeals. Our ability to reason regarding belief cannot be allowed to atrophy in this way.

As such, concerns about failure to develop rational capabilities are not a general reason to eschew belief influence but they do give good pro tanto reasons to prefer rational, reasons-giving belief influence strategies when we consider the legitimacy of strategies in Chapter five.

### 3.6 – Risk of error

Etchemendy introduces what he terms the “risk-of-error” problem:

> “The biggest problem with non-rational influence is that it presents, at least in a wide range of cases, a greater risk of inducing error, where by “inducing error” I mean moving a person’s overall set of beliefs further out of alignment with an accurate and complete account of the world” [@etch2017, 4]

I want to expand Etchemendy's analysis and argue that substantial risk of error arises from belief influence strategies that do appeal to our rationality. The concern, put briefly, is that if we are broadly licensed to pursue belief-influencing strategies against others without any check on the volume or persistence of the given strategies, then individuals who are subject to belief influence will likely find the resulting rational demands extremely onerous. If we are exposed to an enormous volume of attempted rational belief influence, innumerable public reasons and a glut of proffered evidence, then it is fair to imagine one becoming overwhelmed. Put more precisely, what would occur in this circumstance is a heightened risk of two things.

First, we would be more likely to err in the beliefs that we decide on. Overwhelmed by information and influence strategies rational and non-rational, it would be increasingly difficult to weigh up which beliefs we should adopt or attempt to adopt. Think here of the number of issues we do not have firm beliefs on even when we are not the subject of explicit belief-influencing strategies. It certainly seems unlikely, given we are incapable of processing all the nuance of the beliefs being pushed on us, that the decision we come to is more likely than not to be correct.

Second, this situation would hardly be counted as one in which we are operating rationally, and seems likely to lead to fragmentation of our existing beliefs as overwhelming influences cause our suite of beliefs to be pulled in different directions. Goehlert rightly argues that information overload can restrict freedom in this way [@goehlert1980, 113].

We should worry then that too onerous demands for doxastic exposure threaten our ability to apply reason to belief and our ability to avoid fragmentation of our beliefs. (Note here the similarity with stability concerns addressed in Section 3.3.) The thought goes that we have to be able to protect ourselves from this risk and the strong answer might be eschewing all forms of influence.

My response, again, is that the risk of belief-influence leading to some bad consequences in some cases does not amount to a general reason to avoid influential practices. But I think this discussion highlights that there are strong reasons to prefer that our beliefs be influenced slowly without loss of rationality rather than risk error in rapid, overwhelmed changes. As such I recognise going forward the need to limit belief influence to prevent it being so onerous to the influenced that they are too inclined to error.

### 3.7 – Epistemic uncertainty

A passing concern that might give rise to a general reason to avoid belief influence altogether draws on an intuition my discussion hinted at in Sections 3.2 and 3.7. The thought goes that the lack of certainty about being able to successfully influence belief when we pursue a belief-influencing strategy is a good reason to avoid challenging belief. Avoiding influence altogether would mitigate this and we should prefer that.

My response would simply be that avoiding all belief influence in this manner, for the risk that well-intentioned influence strategies do not play out precisely as planned, is an impractical way to go about our doxastic lives. Beliefs can be reliably influenced (see Section 2.1), but we must accept that this occurs with differing levels of success. That is, however unfortunately, just the way that belief works. As such, the concern about epistemic uncertainty gives us reason to be cautious and perhaps consider illegitimate particularly risky belief-influencing strategies, but does not weigh against reasons to want to influence belief.

### 3.8 – The need for principles of legitimate influence

While the seven arguments I have surveyed do not succeed as general reasons to avoid belief influence, they raise an important set of concerns that will influence our discussion of what legitimates belief-influencing strategies.

There may be readers who find one or more of the arguments persuasive or my responses inadequate, and take this to mean that the remainder of my project is unnecessary: why consider the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies when we should prioritise avoiding influencing any beliefs at all? To this reader, I suggest a return to my discussion in Section 2.1 of the untold ways in which our social practices unavoidably influence the beliefs of others. There we accounted for the pervasive role that social influence of belief has in our belief formation and revision. We see this social influence play out in the formation of morally significant beliefs around us. Sarkissian puts a fine point on the folly of thinking we can escape it:

> It is chimerical to think we can effectively refrain from influencing others in our midst. We must rather accept that influencing others is part of social existence, something we bring about not solely through volitional acts but simply by being a focus of others’ attention and awareness [@sarkissian2017, 490].

Consider the way religiosity, cultural preferences and ideological tendencies are not randomly distributed among the population but cluster in communities and are inculcated in the children of those communities. This influence is constant, and our beliefs change over time. This change is an accepted part of our moral life.

It is worth noting here that a particularly hardcore doxastic voluntarist might say that the kind of social influence I am describing is not inevitable for morally significant beliefs because individuals are entirely free to form their own beliefs—they can merely elect not to adopt the beliefs of those around them. I think this objection is readily responded to by noting that, in the event that direct doxastic voluntarism is possible, decisions, while free in a strict sense, are not free from social influence. The information or evidence individuals have available to them, the manner in which it is presented and the prevailing social norms all influence the entirely doxastically voluntary agent. It is implausible to expect them to, largely a priori, arrive at a set of morally significant beliefs that are not traceable, at least in part, to their social circumstances. This is not to say that beliefs substantially contrary to moral norms don't exist. Indeed visionary progressives who anticipate dominant beliefs to come and extraordinary conservatives who would have us commit to the values of yesteryear are present in all societies.

I revisit this analysis of the inescapable reality of the doxastic influence we have on others to reiterate my point that there need not be a large amount of social influence at hand for my investigation of what legitimates belief-influencing strategies to be valuable. The reader who think that any of the concerns surveyed in this Chapter justify a general reason for eschewing all social influence will be doubly conscious of the social influence they inevitably have on others’ beliefs and will be interested in knowing how to exercise this unavoidable influence as responsibly as possible.

One might respond that it is theoretically possible to remove oneself from any doxastic community and, by living as a hermit isolated from all social life, avoid the kind of belief influence that they consider impermissible. I doubt whether this is a practical option for anyone (and wish them the very best of luck in the wilderness), but allow that this is a possible radical (albeit probably unnecessary) response to the problem of social belief influence.

I want to suggest that an advocate of drastically minimising doxastic influence will instead be interested in ensuring that what doxastic influence they cannot avoid having on others in the course of their everyday lives is regulated by some principles of doxastic responsibility. I will consider such principles for the minimally influential doxastic life in Chapter five.

# Chapter 4
## Positive reasons to influence belief

The preceding Chapter raised several reasons to exercise caution in the course of deploying belief-influencing strategies. You would be forgiven at this stage for being slightly sceptical as to whether the benefits of actively exercising belief influence outweigh these reasons. Perhaps belief-influence is just so ethically fraught that we should search for and adopt a regime of belief-influencing practices that minimise to the greatest extent possible the influence we have on others' morally significant beliefs. I want to resist this conclusion and suggest that to do so would not just be unnecessary, but wrong. I intend to offer five positive reasons for pursuing principles of justified belief-influence that allow us to confidently deploy a variety of belief-influence methods in our everyday doxastic practices. There are five reasons to count in favour of actively influencing beliefs.

### 4.1 – Morally significant beliefs generate behaviour

We recognise as political communities the need to regulate behaviour and inculcate certain behaviours in the citizenry. We go to all sorts of social, legislative and punitive lengths to cultivate citizens who do not murder, pay their taxes, do not too greatly disrupt civil society and so on. If the morally significant beliefs that citizens hold are a strong determinant of their behaviour then our goals in regulating behaviour would be greatly aided by influencing beliefs to generate the preferred kinds of behaviour. We might even think this preferable and less onerous than regulation of individual behaviours if particular beliefs turn out to be the root cause of many of an individual's behaviours, as we would expect to be the case for religious individuals or those who subscribe to a particular set of moral principles that they apply to their lives to determine how they should act. This approach would also avoid the counter-intuitive situation whereby instead of trying to fix the cause of many behaviours (beliefs) we instead treat the symptoms (actions).

The evidence suggests that morally significant beliefs do generate behaviour in this way. In surveying the relationship between morally significant beliefs and behaviour, particularly political behaviour, Skitka and Morgan found that moral convictions do radically influence the way people behave and their likelihood of transgressing behavioural regulations [@skitka2014]. For example, an individual’s moral convictions correlate strongly with their voting behaviour in elections and their tendency to engage in activism on the issues that are important to them [@skitka2014, 100]. Where people’s morally significant beliefs clash with the “establishment, convention, rules, or authorities” they are likely to behave in accordance with those beliefs rather than following institutional rules or the law [@skitka2014, 101]. In short, changing morally significant beliefs will change behaviour.

Skitka and Morgan offer positive and negative ways of interpreting these results [@skitka2014, 107]. The positive analysis would be to think that people’s strong tendency to act in accordance with their beliefs motivates individuals to fight for what they view as right and means they are not merely obedient to the law and social norms. The negative view would be to think that the sway morally significant beliefs hold over behaviour might “fuel backlash against the legitimacy of political systems” and contribute to heinous ideologically-motivated behaviour like terrorism or sectarian conflict.

I contend that both analyses give us strong positive reasons to actively influence beliefs. Influencing beliefs to bring others onto our side of moral disagreements, and inculcating good beliefs is a lasting and effective way of changing behaviour and guaranteeing support for causes you find valuable. Likewise, having the opportunity to influence beliefs allows us to intervene to prevent the worst behavioural consequences of morally significant beliefs. Consider the cause of the anti-racist activist who is invested in recruiting others to their cause, but also at a minimum wants to influence the beliefs of racists to reduce the prevalence of racist behaviour in society. On two counts, then, we should prefer to have the opportunity to actively and substantially influence belief.

### 4.2 – Beliefs are key to political conflict resolution

A second, related reason for wanting licence to actively influence belief points to morally significant beliefs as the cause of major political and social conflicts. Consider the ideological and religious conflict that causes massive loss of life and instability in the Middle East and other places, the denialism and anti-scientism that has inhibited meaningful action on climate change, and domestic political struggles over the legal rights of gay couples. Looking to the future we have every reason to expect that ongoing debates on matters such as the legal rights of transgender people, new gene therapies and the changing shape of familial relationships will be grounded in belief. My purpose here is to highlight the key role that belief plays in generating conflict in our political lives, and the enormous role that belief influence plays in resolving (however slowly and imperfectly) that conflict. We should want to secure this role.

One might object that this observation is not a justificatory story for active belief influence. Just because it has previously worked to resolve conflict does not mean it is the right thing to do. I contend this is certainly likely to have justificatory value for consequentialists: belief influence offers attaining the kind of outcomes we want in the world. For others it may not be a justifying reason, but it should offer a powerful reason to consider others offered.

### 4.3 – Beliefs are crucial to moral calculations

Beyond consequential justifications, I would argue that an individual’s moral beliefs are an appropriate subject of social regulation. I recognise that this thought is directly opposed to the intuitions about freedom of belief discussed in Chapter three.

Let’s return to the example I raised in Section 3.1 of the individual who holds sexist beliefs but does not behave at all in a manner that reflects their views. I said there was something to the thought that we still want to reproach and reform their sexist beliefs despite the intuition they are free to believe as they like. I note, first, that we are usually quite confident reproaching sexist _behaviour_, and, depending on its severity, using state power and the threat of punishment to regulate it. The acceptability of publicly reproaching sexists and strong harassment and anti-discrimination legislation evidence this.

But is it fair that we want to demand they change their beliefs when to do so would not have any effect on others? Are the beliefs in themselves the appropriate subject of influence? I think yes, for two reasons.

First, judging individuals’ beliefs is already an important part of moral practice. We use beliefs to ascribe moral responsibility. For example, in a case where two murderers are tried and one is found to believe their act is righteous but the other believes the opposite and went through with the killing because they were coerced, we would hold the first murderer more morally responsible because we are able to differentiate between the two on the basis of their beliefs. We take into moral account the influences which caused the murderers’ beliefs even in the case of the second murderer where their belief had no effect on the action. Consider a world where extreme peer pressure causes everyone to be publicly discriminatory towards short people. Would we not prefer that individuals privately believe that their public discrimination is wrong, even when the peer pressure is of such magnitude that they feel they cannot act in accordance with their beliefs? These examples indicate that it is an important feature of our approach to morality that beliefs are factors in moral calculations, even when they don’t affect the real world. There are instances then where it is valuable to influence belief when belief change would have no practical effect.

Second, we should view others’ private possession of abhorrent beliefs as a social failing. To not want to attempt influencing abhorrent beliefs even when they don’t manifest in behaviour expresses something wrong on our part. Roughly, it indicates that we’re willing to live in a world where people can believe abhorrent things unhindered. This is reason enough, I think, to desire licence to actively influence belief. Moreover, because a particular set of beliefs and capabilities to develop beliefs are inculcated in children by the state and social norms, the acquisition of abhorrent beliefs by individuals is a particularly damning social failing. To the extent that as citizens society’s failings are our own, we have a strong reason to actively pursue belief influence.

### 4.4 – Society’s values should reflect aggregated beliefs

We do not want, I think, to live in a society that allows for the possibility that an overwhelming majority of the populace believes something incongruent with the behaviour enforced by institutions of justice. Consider two hypothetical societies to see why this seems wrong. In the first society an overwhelming majority of citizens hold beliefs that lead them to favour considerable redistribution of wealth, but their political institutions do not reflect this and inequality abounds. This not only leads to what we might consider bad outcomes for citizens, but plausibly alienates citizens from their society  when they see the majority held belief is not represented. This creates problems for the legitimacy of the society’s political institutions if citizens, owing to their beliefs, are unlikely to endorse government policy. Of course there will always be some disconnect between the aggregate beliefs of society and the norms enforced by its institutions; they cannot map perfectly onto each other. But this example illustrates the problems that occur when this difference becomes large.

In a second society the majority of citizens have racist beliefs, but these are prevented from becoming the behavioural norm by strong institutions that aggressively prevent discrimination. I take it this society suffers from the same alienation and legitimacy problems as the first. This society’s belief/norm disconnect is also likely preventing it from effectively developing in a coherent way. We have shown that beliefs are a reliable driver of behaviour. If there is a disconnect between citizens' beliefs and the institutions of society that prevent belief-motivated behaviour from occurring, then the power of this effect to reinforce political institutions is lost, to the detriment of that society.

The view here is that aggregated individual moral commitments should be at least partly constitutive of social moral norms. Some disconnect between social values and widespread individual beliefs is okay and our institutions do and should work to regulate our worst social urges. But at some point this becomes counter-productive. We should prefer social values and individuals’ beliefs to match in an environment where doxastic influence is useful and can achieve progressive reform, rather than using progressively less legitimate political regulation to avoid the need to change beliefs in the interests of social change.

### 4.5 – Beliefs influence is desirable

A point that counts in favour of active belief influence—however obvious and simple it may be—is that many people do actively seek to have their beliefs influenced. We see this in behaviour. People go looking for evidence to affirm or change their existing beliefs and are often open to discussing their morally significant beliefs; they might try out different churches throughout their life to see different beliefs in practice, and tend to be at peace with doxastic social influence and recognise that many of their beliefs can and will change. I take it then that, by and large, we take belief influence to be a vital part of our social and emotional lives: it helps to affirm our own beliefs and develop new ones. Moreover, we often want to revise and improve our beliefs, to bring them closer to the truth and make them more coherent and defensible. This should count as a weak but relevant reason in favour of active belief influence.

The arguments I have just surveyed indicate there are good positive reasons for ourselves as individuals and, more importantly, as people invested in the health of our society and political institutions to pursue belief influence. I hope these weigh against the more influence-minimising intuitions that dominated the previous Chapter. Consequentialists and political liberals will likely take some of the reasons I have given to justify active belief influence, but even if you don’t think the reasons provide a justificatory story for substantial use of belief-influencing strategies, they remain compelling reasons to identify what responsible belief-influence looks like. It is to this task we now turn.

# Chapter 5
## Principles of legitimate doxastic influence

Our discussion thus far has introduced the class of morally significant beliefs, rejected general reasons to eschew belief influence, considered contributing factors to the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies and given positive reasons to pursue active belief influence. This Chapter addresses the special place of persuasion in the ethics of influence literature before introducing and discussing three principles of legitimate doxastic influence that should regulate our selection of belief-influencing strategies.

### 5.1 – The place of persuasion

Reasons-giving persuasion of the type one expects to happen in a courtroom or university classroom enjoys a status of default legitimacy compared to other belief influence strategies. Fârte expresses what I understand to be the common view of persuasion’s virtues:

> Conceived as an alternative to doxastic coercion, evidential persuasion produces correct beliefs in accordance with proper standards of evidence. It helps people reach the highest possible standards of rationality and morality. Evidential persuasion is based on the principles of symmetry and reciprocity in that it asks all persuaders to use for changing the beliefs of others only those means they used in forming their own beliefs respecting the freedom of will and assuming the standard of rationality [@farte2016, 74].

This passage hints at several possible features of justified belief strategies, but it does somewhat understate the need to moderate our trust in persuasion. There are several relevant features of the strategy that contemporary analysis highlights. First, persuasion rarely causes instant belief changes upon the presentation of a correct argument or the right evidence. It operates by the same “latent, indirect, and delayed effects” as other strategies [@mackie2006, 288]. Second, Summers’ meta-analysis of recent results in social psychology found the changes in moral beliefs that we take to be the result of persuasion are overwhelmingly _post hoc_ rationalisations of “instincts, inclinations, stereotypes, emotions, neurobiology, habits, reactions, evolutionary pressures, unexamined principles, or justifications other than the ones we think we’re acting on” [@summers2017]. Haidt's analysis of earlier results concur with this conclusion [@haidt2001, 816]. I think these results should moderate any trust we might have once had in our ability to distinguish when we have successfully persuaded from the successful deployment of other belief-influencing strategies. Powers rightly argues that upshot here is “the difference between persuasion and coercion is not precise or self-evident” [@powers2007, 125]. Finally, despite emphasising the social benefits of rational persuasion, Tsai is cautious to note that it is open to abuse and can be deployed paternalistically [@tsai2014, 79-80].

As such, we should not underestimate the difficulty of drawing an unambiguous line between persuasion and other belief-influencing strategies. Consider the lawyer who deploys considerable charm at the same time as offering reasons and evidence, or an intellectual bully who harangues you with reasons in an attempt to change your view by attrition. Rational persuasion ought to remain a preferred method of influence for all the reasons discussed in Section 3.5, but this is not to underestimate the difficulty of identifying impermissibly coercive and manipulative strategies masquerading as rationality. To have appropriate regard for this difficulty, principles of legitimate influence ought to avoid enumerating legitimate belief-influencing strategies and instead guide our choices of strategies and the disposition with which they are deployed.

### 5.2 – Rejecting coercion and manipulation

The first necessary condition for the legitimacy of a belief-influencing strategy is that it does not coerce or manipulate the influenced person. There are two elements to my account here.

First, we should view strategies that influence beliefs by giving people prudential reasons to change (or act to indirectly change) their beliefs as illegitimate. I follow McMyler in thinking that this amounts to coercion [@mcmyler2011, 556]. Threats or use of violence or social coercion like ostracism from a friendship group and shaming can affect belief-change by giving prudential reasons for someone to aggressively attempt belief change, but these strategies are not evidentiary and unfairly distort the suite of possible beliefs an individual can rationally engage with [@radzik2014, 660].

Second, belief-influencing strategies that involve the influencer knowingly lying to or misleading the subject should be regarded as manipulative and hence impermissible. While it might be easier to bring about belief change about the moral status of vegetarianism by exaggerating the suffering of animals in slaughterhouses, this undermines the influenced person’s ability to have confidence in the evidence that influenced their belief and should be avoided. But how do we reconcile this requirement with the use of emotional appeals or highlighting particular evidence regarding a situation? These are not necessarily misleading, although intentionally withholding relevant evidence is certainly manipulative. There is a difference between taking someone to an abattoir in aide of persuading them to cease eating meat and fabricating the suffering of animals to the same end. The use of images and experiences at the abattoir is fine so long as they do not mislead the subject. They must be relevant to the morally significant belief at issue. This analysis would also suggest the aforementioned lawyer's use of charm to persuade is illegitimate: charm is simply not relevant to the content of the morally significant belief at issue. To exploit its power would amount to manipulation.

### 5.3 – Indoctrination or moral education?

It follows from Section 5.3 that indoctrinatory strategies of belief influence are clearly illegitimate on my account. This raises two interesting cases that will caveat the first condition of coercion or manipulation voiding legitimacy of a belief-influencing strategy. First, should we consider the inculcation of beliefs in children (frequently without reasons-giving) that occurs in schools illegitimate? Second, there are circumstances—say when an adult has been brainwashed into joining a cult—when no belief-influencing strategies but coercive or manipulative interventions are likely to achieve the desired belief change. Are we ever justified in taking such steps?

Merry's analysis of what legitimates moral education of children can be expanded to elegantly answer both questions. Merry argues that it is permissible to instill ethical principles in children who are yet to fully develop an ability to rationally engage with belief influence when those principles are minimally required to create a “foundation on which autonomy and rationality can build” [@merry2005, 412; @bialystok2014, 415]. On this view it is not coercive to drastically influence the moral beliefs of children so long as the influence does no more than inculcate their rational capabilities. We need not be worried here about this principle of moral education preventing the teaching of substantive morality to children in a manner like currently teach kindness or the value of sharing. Coercive or manipulative methods are available to secure the autonomy and rationality of children and, from there, legitimate influence strategies are merely governed by the minimal principles of legitimate doxastic influence I set out in 5.7. This might see a requirement that we explain the value of kindness and the like to children, but it would not forestall moral education in any devastating sense.

The same principle justifies the occasional deployment of coercive belief-influencing strategies against adults. Think here of the adult who has fallen into a cult. Typically forced reeducation or deprogramming courses would be paradigm cases of coercion and strictly impermissible, but if membership of the cult has eroded the autonomy and rationality of the individual I would argue that they are returned to the same state as a child and we are justified in intervening coercively only to the extent necessary to restore their rationality.

One might object that this approach is paternalistic to adults, but I contend that belief influence can secure an individual’s rationality without inculcating a full conception of the good. As such, the approach does not allow one adult to indoctrinate a conception of the good in another—it is not paternalistic. Further, having stable rationality allows one to identify and avoid paternalistic policies and other manipulation. The adult who is the subject of coercive belief-influencing strategies to restore their rationality is therefore not paternalised, but in a better position to avoid being the subject of paternalism.

### 5.4 – Preferring rational influence

Following my argument in Section 3.5, I contend that a strong preference for electing to use rational, reasons-giving belief-influencing strategies is the second necessary principle in determining legitimate belief-influencing strategies. Non-rational strategies like nudging or appeals to emotion are not wrong so long as their use is not coercive or manipulative by the standards I have identified. I have, however, explicated the practical difficulty of determining whether particular strategies amount to manipulation in a given circumstance so suggest that an important way of mitigating this risk is explicitly communicating your intent to deploy a non-rational belief-influencing strategy to the subject of the strategy. Coupled with a strong preference for the selection of rational strategies, this condition for legitimate belief influence can appropriately engage the influence person's rational capabilities [@horsthemke2014 38; @scarantino2008, 32].

Consider the legitimate deployment of two archetypal forms of non-rational influence: emotional appeals and nudging. In contrast to the illegitimate uses of emotional appeals like the use of charm by a lawyer, consider the useful aide that non-rational emotional evidence brings to reasons-giving persuasive argument. The image of Alan Kurdi, a three year old Kurdish refugee who drowned in the Mediterranean Sea in 2015, is, in my view, an effective and legitimate tool in influencing beliefs about refugees. Kurdi’s image assists in the processing of reasons-giving testimony about the reality of life as a refugee. Kelland and Macleod acknowledge this role of emotional aides in their analysis of using images in debates about the permissibility of abortion:

> affective responses themselves by disclosing value, directing our attention and making available to us our inherent moral judgements should not be seen as merely sentimentally evocative. Rather, they presuppose rationality [@kelland2015, 192]

Likewise, nudging strategies that exploit results in behavioural psychology—for example, modifying default options for organ donors, rearranging items on a menu or aggressively presenting graphic information about the risk of behaviours like smoking—are not necessarily wrong when deployed with a view to influencing morally significant beliefs. Such strategies modify the context of a choice, but I agree with Sunstein that they do not remove an individual’s freedom in making that choice and therefore should not be considered manipulative for our purposes [@sunstein2015, 512; @quigley2014].

But while they are not strictly impermissible I have argued that we should prefer rational to non-rational belief-influencing strategies because the former exercise the rational abilities we are required to maintain to live a full doxastic life. Riley rightly counts this necessity to develop the “capacity to engage in critical reason” among the reasons to eschew nudging and similar strategies for rational alternatives [@riley2017, 605]. I further follow Etchemendy in thinking that frequent deployment of non-rational strategies on the part of a belief influencer indicates something “arrogant and presumptuous” about their approach to doxastic influence [@etch2017, 34]. This should be avoided.

### 5.5 – The content of beliefs

Before I synthesise the preceding Sections into three principles of legitimate doxastic influence, I want to address the role that the content of beliefs we are trying to impress on others should play in the legitimising belief-influencing strategies. If a belief we hold is true and we are incredibly confident in it, then should that not influence the belief-influencing strategies available to us? Can we not go further in disseminating this belief than someone who holds an incorrect belief?

I think a correct account of legitimate doxastic influence answers no to both of these questions and should be neutral to the content of beliefs that people would like to inculcate in others. In the first instance, I take issue with the thought that we should have more strategies available to us to push a belief that we have a high degree of confidence in. Issues with the epistemic accessibility and accuracy of measuring confidence aside, confidence in a belief tends not to correlate with that belief going uncontested. Allowing increased confidence to expand the range of legitimate belief-influencing strategies would result in the deluded individual with extreme confidence in their beliefs and the religious zealot who considers their beliefs dogma having greater license to influence moral belief than the rational person with an appropriate level of doubt about the truth of their beliefs.

One might point out that we do not typically allow belief-influence to proceed in a content-neutral way. We clearly favour some beliefs over others by, say, teaching children the value of multiculturalism without introducing opposing white-supremacist views into the classroom. I do not think this is inconsistent with content-neutrality, simply because it is up to individuals and organisations to decide what belief-influence they choose to pursue and it is the proponents of multiculturalism in this case that hold positions of influence. That is to say that there is a difference between saying that the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies does not bear on the content of the beliefs being pushed and requiring that all beliefs have equal opportunities to be influential. I have only argued for the former. This position means that ethicists of belief need not agree what constitutes a correct or good belief. Further, by avoiding prescribing which beliefs are right, the content-neutrality requirement allows room for minority beliefs to gain majority appeal over time. Recall this was a necessary requirement of realistic account of legitimate doxastic influence.

One might object that content-neutrality wrongly affords holders of morally abhorrent beliefs the same right to influence as everyone else. To carry this objection, it’s proponent would have to defend a substantive account of correct belief that identifies which beliefs are abhorrent enough to warrant restriction. I acknowledge the efforts of the liberal analyses of hate speech to identify such an account, but suggest that the lack of success in that regard should lead us to prefer a content-neutral approach that grants the same methods of belief-influence to all members of the doxastic community [@song2014, 1047]

### 5.6 – Three principles of legitimate doxastic influence

Proposed principles of ethical influence have been largely domain-specific, focussing for example on the gamification of employment and conduct of advertisers [@kim2016, 157; @lee2013, 227]. None of these have focussed on the particular issues that arise from doxastic influence. As such, I offer three principles for the selection of legitimate doxastic influence strategies that have arisen from the preceding discussion.

1. Belief-influencing strategies which are coercive or manipulative in the senses discussed in Section 5.3 are illegitimate, except where they are deployed to instill in someone the rationality required to participate in the doxastic community
2. We should strongly prefer rational belief-influencing strategies
3. We should be transparent about the belief-influencing methods or methods being deployed. Where possible this should involve the explicit communication to the subject of your intent to influence their belief

I’ve discussed at some length in Sections 5.2 and 5.3 the kind of strategies the first principle would render legitimate. Likewise, Section 5.5 addresses the consequences of a preference for rational strategies. With regard to the third principle I contend that a requirement for transparency of method contributes to the legitimacy of belief-influencing strategies for the same reasons as the preference for rational strategies: it minimises concerns about undermining of autonomy and the risk of paternalism without limiting the belief-influencing strategies available to an influencer. The third principle may trade off some effectiveness of some non-rational influence methods by alerting the subject to their operation, but I do not see this as a negative feature of the account: if a subject’s awareness of a strategy undermines that strategy’s effectiveness then that is merely the subject exercising their freedom to resist influence.

The practical impact of adopting these principles of doxastic influence would be somewhat varied. The idealised picture of honest and careful reasons-giving persuasion remains the most legitimate method of belief influence on my account. Indeed, the common approaches to belief influence that the principles deem illegitimate are those most used by advertisers, politicians and evangelists: parties who do not necessarily explicitly acknowledge their purpose in influencing your beliefs and tend to exploit affective and other non-rational influence strategies to effect changes in belief [@lee2013, 225]. A strength of my account is that it clarifies the legitimate role that use of images and emotional appeals can play in our everyday doxastic practices. Scarantino raises the example of “driver education courses where young drivers are taken to visit rehabilitation centres for road accident victims” [@scarantino2008, 28]. It is clear, on my view, that coupled with the evidence and reasons-giving elements of an education course this is permissible.

It is worth considering whether the application of the principles differ for the state and other institutions. I would suggest that the state and institutions might have different belief-influencing methods available to them and certainly operate at a different scale of belief-influence but because the subject of the influence remains individuals they can be regulated by the same principles. Further consideration could be given to whether there are distinct features of belief influence by the state and other institutions that change what legitimates their beliefs-influence strategies. Perhaps state duties to the citizenry that individuals do not possess override certain concerns about manipulation. This bears further research.

### 5.7 – Conclusion

The ethical issues that arise from the nature of morally significant beliefs and the legitimacy of particular belief-influencing methods remains under-researched. Good attention has been given to individual influence strategies and categories of permissible influence in general, but too little work has been done to draw this research together and make it responsive to the particular role belief plays in our personal and political lives. Several issues worthy of further attention include explicating the practical impact of adopting principles of legitimate doxastic influence, clarifying the application of the principles to state exercises of influence, and considering how persistent we are permitted to be in pursuing a belief-influencing strategy.

This paper considered the particularities of morally significant beliefs, responded to arguments that we should minimise doxastic influence we have over others and offered positive reasons for pursuing active belief-influencing strategies. Finally, I synthesised my discussion into three principles of legitimate doxastic influence. The advantage of the principles I’ve tendered is they are responsive to the reality of our doxastic practices. More often than not we have an array of belief-influencing strategies to chose from and a further need to behave with awareness of our passive social belief influence. The principles eschew enumerating illegitimate beliefs and instead guide this choice and the disposition towards transparency that I have argued is required of responsible doxastic practice. They offer a clear starting point for us to become more responsible influencers of belief and more responsible members of healthy doxastic communities.

# References
